--- Page 1 ---
TAUNTON'S 
CORNISH 
HEN MENU 
MORELS 
SLOW-RISE 
BREAD 
VEGETABLE 
STOCKS 
RACK OF 
LAMB 
$4.95 CAN $5.95 
05 
1 64904 
1 
• 
APRIL/MAY 1995 NO.8 
me 
FOR PEOPLE WHO LOVE TO COOK

--- Page 2 ---
Swanson® Broth 
Could Put Butter Out Of Business. 
For mouth-watering mashed potatoes, swap the 
butter and milk for Swanson" Chicken Broth. 
For delicious vegetables, simmer 
in Swanson" Vegetable Broth. 
Then forget the butter. 
For gravy that gets raves, skip 
the drippings - except one 
tablespoon (plus three table­
spoons of flour) per can of 
Swanson" Beef Broth. 
I 
For free recipes made with 99% fat-free 
SwansonϢ Broth cal 1-800-4-SWANSON. 
Swanson® Broth. When all you want to add is flavor.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENTS 
4 Letters 
10 Q&A Cleaning 
discolored aluminum, 
rescuing English toffee, 
tropical oils 
18 Notes Demi-Glace 
Gold, Just Bell Peppers 
22 Tips Peeling kiwi, uses 
for zip-lock bags 
76 Basics Mayonnaise, 
breadcrumbs, croutons 
80 Food Science 
Hard-boiled eggs 
82 Presentations 
Dan Budd 
84 Revie ws Cookbooks 
for bread machines 
86 Flavorings Dill 
88 Calendar 
92 Advertiser Index 
93 Recipe & 
Technique Index 
93 Nutrition 
Information 
94 Tidbits 
On the cover: Creme Caromel, p. 71; 
Cornish Game Hens, p. 30. 
Cover phoro and inset, Ellen Silverman. 
This pa!,'C: top. T cny Morse; middle, Ellen Silvenllan, 
bottom. Matthew Kestenbaum. 
fine 
ARTiClES 
30 Big Flavor from a Small Bird by Lucia Watson 
Cornish game hens are delicious, versatile, and right for any 
seasonal menu 
36 Quick and Versatile Vegetable Stocks 
by Annie Somerville 
Customize these cooking liquids to suit the season and your recipe 
40 May: Time to Start a Rumpot by Marlene Parrish 
The season's best berries, plus rum and sugar, make a luscious 
wintertime dessert 
42 Roasting Rack of Lamb by Molly Stevens 
Cooked whole, the rack is more than the sum of its chops 
45 Morels-More than Just Mushrooms by Amy Farges 
Delicacies from the forest floor herald the arrival of spring 
Two dishes that celebrate morels by Sam Hayward 48 
50 Slow .. Rising Breads by Amy Scherber 
Start with a yeast sponge to make chewy, delicious loaves 
54 Delighting in Wild Greens byJohnN. Kallas 
It may be a weed, but it might be delicious 
58 White Chocolate Mousse Cake by Sebastian Brecht 
A step-by-step approach makes this gorgeous cake easy as pie 
62 One Soup, Four Wines byJoshEisen 
A delicious experiment illustrates the logic behind matching 
wine and food 
66 Fragrant, Pungent Coriander by Carolyn Haynes 
Could this be the world's most popular herb? 
71 Classic Creme Caramel by Susan McCreight Lindeborg 
A light touch and gentle baking make a silky smooth custard 
Fine Coo
king (ISSN 1072·5121) is published bimonthly by T he Taunton Press, Inc., Newtown, cr 064 70-5506. Tel. 203/426·8171. Second-class postage is paid at Newtown, 
cr 064 70 and at additional mailing offices. GST paid registration # 123210981. U.S. distribution by ICDlThe Hearst Corporation, 250 West 55th St., 
ew York, NY 10019 
and Eastern 
ews Distributors, Inc., 1130 Cleveland Rd., Sandusky, OH 44870. 
50 Slow-Rising 
Breads 
42 Roasting Rack 
of Lamb 
40 
Postmaster: Send address changes to Fine Cooking, The Taunton Press, Inc., 63 South Main Street, PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470·5506. 
Printed in the USA

--- Page 4 ---
LETTERS 
If you're seeking an outlet for your 
thoughts on topics like our most 
recent baking article, genetically 
engineered tomatoes, or your food 
and cooking philosophies, look no 
further. Send your letters on these 
and other topics to letters, Fine 
Cooking, PO Box 5506, Newtown, 
CT 06470-5506. 
HOW TO BU ilD A WOOD­
BURNING OVEN 
In response to Nan Crocker's query about 
wood-burning ovens in Letters, Fine 
Cooking #5, excellent plans for a back­
yard oven are available from Alan Scott, 
Ovencrafters, 5600 Marshall-Petaluma 
Rd., Petaluma, CA 94952. 
A listing of North American manu­
facturers of masonry heating systems, 
some of which feature ovens, as well as 
about 50 stovemasons may be obtained 
from the Masonry Heater Association of 
North America, 1 1490 Commerce Park 
Dr., Reston, VA 22091 . 
M y own company, Masonry Stove 
Builders (RRS, Shawville, Quebec JOX 
2YO) , manufactures a wood-burning 
masonry heater that has been optimized 
around a brick oven. It's suitable for 
someone planning a new house or reno­
vation, and it replaces a standard ma­
sonry fireplace. 
-Norbert Sen!, 
Shawville, Quebec 
YOU'VE GOT THE WRONG DUCK 
The article on foie gras in your December/ 
January issue (Fine Cooking #6, p. 37), 
incorrectly named the ducks at the feed 
pump as Muscovy ducks, when in fact 
they were Pekin ducks. This may seem 
neither here nor there, but there is one 
important difference. 
All domestic ducks, except Mus­
covies, are mallard derived. That is to 
say, some thousands of years ago, people 
began to tame wild mallards and, by se­
lective breeding, produced a food re­
source that would not fly away in the fall 
when the weather got cold. Since mal­
lards are migratory, they have evolved 
with a metabolism that accumulates and 
lays down fat rapidly. This fat sustains the 
birds on long, arduous migrations. 
4 
Muscovy ducks, on the other hand, 
are derived from nonmigratory South 
American tree ducks. They do not get fat. 
Thus, Pekins, Rouens, and the other 
"fat" ducks are for foie gras and confit, 
while Muscovies are for magret. 
-Fred Pullman, 
conservation and 
wildlife consultant, 
Little Compton, RI 
E di tors' note: We passed this letter to 
Ariane Daguin, of D'Artagnan, a native 
of Gascony and leading foie gras distribu­
tor, who is author Wayne Nish's supplier. 
Ariane Dag uin's re ply: You are right 
about the photo: these ducks are defi­
nitely Pekins (or Long Island style ducks, 
as they're called in New England) . 
However, your statement about which 
ducks are for foie gras and which are for 
magret is not entirely correct. It is true 
that migratory birds (of mallard descent) 
tend to gorge themselves before migra­
tion, creating their foie gras naturally, to 
be able to store fat and calories during 
their long journey. Also true is the fact 
that nonmigratory tree ducks, Muscovy 
ducks (or Barbaries in France) are better 
known for their fabulously large thoracic 
capacity, and thus tend to have a beauti­
fully large-muscled breast. 
But most of the foie gras in the world 
comes from a duck that encompasses the 
best of both breeds: the Moulard duck, 
which is a cross between a Muscovy 
drake and a Pekin hen. This man-made 
"mule," which is sterile, gets the magnif­
icent foie gras from his Pekin genes, and 
the excellent breast (or magret) from his 
Muscovy side. 
By the way, in France, only the breast 
of a duck that has produced foie gras can 
by law be called magret (also spelled mai­
gret). Any other breast of duck has to be 
simply called breast. 
-Ariane Daguin, co-owner, 
D'Artagnan, 
Jersey City, NJ 
SALMON IS BETTER 
WHEN IT'S WilD 
I was rather shocked to read Christer 
Larsson's recommendation of farmed 
salmon rather than wild salmon in his 
otherwise excellent article on gravlax 
fin 
CDOKING 
Editor Martha Holmberg 
Art Director Steve Hunter 
Associate Editor Jan Newberry 
Assistant Editors Suzanne Roman, Dana Harris, 
Matthew Kestenbaum 
Copy/Production Editor Li Agen 
Graphic Designer Rosalie Vaccaro 
Editorial Secretary Kim Landi 
Recipe Tester Abigail Johnson Dodge 
Contributing Editors Shirley O. Corriher, 
Paul Bertolli 
Design Director Susan Edelman 
Editorial Director John Lively 
Circulation Coordinator Sarah Roman 
Advertising Manager Tom Leihbacher 
Advertising Accounts Manager Doris Hanley 
Associate Accounts Manager Paul McGahren 
Advertising Sales Coordinator Nancy Crider 
Marketing Secretary Jeanne Arendt 
How to contact The Taunton Press: 
Telephone: 
800/283-7252 
203/426-8 1 7 1 
Fax: 
2031426-3434 
E-Mail (editorial only): 
America Online: 
FlNECOOKNG 
CompuServe: 
74602,2651 
Subscriptions: 
Orders: 
800/888-8286 
Customer Service: 
800/477-8727 
Advertising Sales: 
800/283-7252 x 547 
Retail Sales: 
800/283-7252 x 238 
Copyright 1995 by T he Taunton Press, Inc. No reproduction 
without permission of The Taunton Press, Inc. Fine Cooking­
is a registered trademark of The Taunton Press, Inc. Sub­
scription rates: U.S. and possessions, $26 for one year, $42 
for two years, $58 for three years; other countries, $32 for 
one year, $52 for two years, $72 for three years (in U.S. dol­
lars, please). Single copy, $4.95. Single copies outside U.S. 
and possessions, $5.95. Address correspondence to the ap­
propriate department (Subscription, Editorial, or Adver­
tising) , T he Taunton Press, 63 South Main St., PO Box 5506, 
Newtown, cr 06470-5506. 
Writing an article 
Fine Cooking welcomes article proposals from 
our readers. We acknowledge all submissions, 
return those we can't use, and pay for articles 
we publish. Send proposals to Fine Cooking, 
PO Box 5506, Newtown, cr 06470--5506. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 5 ---
Aging has given our rums a smoothnes, whether straight or mixed, that has made them prefered over al others. 
And only in Puerto Rico, with its heritage of fine rums, is aging guaranteed by law. 
RUMS OF PUERTO RICO'l ONLY THE FINEST

--- Page 6 ---
LETTERS 
in your DecemberlJanuary issue (Fine 
Cooking #6, p. 5 2) . As a commercial 
salmon fisherman living in a coastal com­
munity in British Columbia (with dozens 
of fish farms in our immediate area) , 
I can only conclude that Mr. Larsson has 
been badly misinformed about both wild 
and farmed salmon. 
When commercially blast-frozen, wild 
salmon is as parasite-free as farmed 
salmon. However, farmed salmon are un­
healthy salmon. They are fed antibiotics 
and chemical feeds throughout their life 
cycle. Farmed salmon are also crowded to­
gether by the thousands in small pens and 
hardly move during their life. They live 
amidst their own waste and many of these 
poor creatures die and float on the surface 
of these pens. Their flesh is soft and mushy 
and, as workers in a fish processing plant 
have witnessed, they are subject to dis­
coloration and internal diseases. 
The infinitely preferable wild salmon 
range thousands of miles during their no­
madic four-year life cycle, building firm 
flesh while they live on natural feed. 
Fresh and fresh-frozen wild salmon are 
by far the preferred salmon for sushi in 
the Japanese market and for the French 
restaurant market. Surely these fastidi­
ous buyers are intensely interested in 
parasite-free flesh. 
Mr. Larsson's recommendation to use 
farmed salmon for his gravlax is anal­
ogous to using canned vegetables or pro­
cessed cheese for gourmet recipes. 
My wife and I have made gravlax for 
many years and have employed wild 
sockeye salmon to produce a premiere 
red-colored, firm, parasite-free product. 
I highly recommend that Mr. Larsson 
make a comparison test, and I am sure 
he will not fail to note the satisfaction of 
his patrons. 
-Richard Gross, 
Sointula, BC 
Editors' reply: We were unable to con­
tact Christer Larsson before this issue 
went to press, so we can't speak for him, 
but we would like to point out that the 
primary reason given for using farmed 
salmon was to minimize the risk of para­
sites, which are found only in fish that 
spend part of their life cycle in fresh 
water. Commercially blast-frozen wild 
salmon is Mr. Gross' preference and was, 
in fact, recommended by Mr. Larsson, 
but not all consumers can buy it in their 
local markets. For those cooks who don't 
wish to risk parasites, farmed salmon is 
the next best choice, since home freez­
ing destroys the texture of the fish. 
FOOD IRRADIATION I S 
SAFE AND BEN EFICIAL 
I realize that the subject of food irradia­
tion seems controversial, but that is only 
because there is a small cadre of "natural," 
antiobjective fanatics who get lots of press 
because they help sell papers and TV 
news-entertainment segments. In reality, 
there is no controversy. Food irradiation 
is an exceedingly safe, nonaltering form of 
sterilization. It is the first major improve­
ment in food preservation in centuries. 
Think about it-all other forms of 
food preservation alter the product sig­
nificantly in one way or another. Radi­
ation makes practically no gross change 
in the food, and it leaves no significant 
residue of any kind; especially no poten­
tially dangerous residue like salt or ni­
trites. It is practically the "answer to a 
maiden's prayer" as far as safety and 
effectiveness go. 
The only arguments come from those 
few who are hysterically and irrationally 
opposed to any positive use of modem 
science technology, especially anything 
to do with radiation. 
For objective, scientific information, I 
refer you to the American Veterinary 
Medical Association (AVMA) , specifi­
cally to an article in the A VMAJoumal of 
January 15, 1994, pp. 167-168. I am sure 
you can get further information from the 
association by calling 800/248-2862. I sus­
pect you can get information from the 
AMA also, but in all honesty, experts in 
veterinary medicine probably know more 
on this subject than those in human med­
icine. A computer search of Medline could 
well tum up some references in this area. 
Consumers, especially the professional 
consumers who read Fine Cooking, need 
objective information in this area. This is, 
quite literally, a life and death matter. 
-D.B. Cameron, DVM 
Middleburg Heights, OH • 
Fine Cooking is looking for a managing 
editor with a strong cooking back­
ground. Candidates should have at 
least three years magazine experience, 
recipe development and editing skills, 
and proven organizational and man­
agerial abilities. Photo skills a plus. 
Frequent travel. We offer a competi­
tive salary, excellent benefits, and a 
pleasant work environment. Send a 
letter and resume to Personnel De­
partment, The Taunton Press, 63 S. 
Main St., Newtown, CT 06470. 
Taunton 
PUBLICATIONS 
for fellew enthusiasts 
The Taunton Press: Paul Roman, chairmani Janice A. 
Roman, president; Peter Chidsey, executive vice president; 
Carolyn Kovaleski, administrative secretary. Corporate 
Editorial: John Lively, editor in chief & vice president; Ruth 
Dobsevage. managing editor; Peter Chapman, Thomas C. 
McKenna, Zachary Gaulkin. Personnel: Carol Marotti, 
Flanagan, Lynda Morris, promotion; Thomas Greco, Deborah Baldwin, books; Philip VanKirk, 
Tracie Pavlik, magazines. Vrdeo: Craig Umanoff, T homas Menard. Corporate Marketing: Diane 
Patterson, Sarah Roman. Corporate Sales: Dale Brown, director; Laurie Clark, Thomas Johnson, 
Frances Allen, Barbara Buckalew, Donna Weinstein, Donna Pierpont, Marcie Seigel. Fulfillment 
& Operations: Thomas Luxeder, director; Jane Torrence. Client Services: Patricia Williamson, 
manager; Carolyn Arneth, Kathryn Dolson. Subscriber Services: Patricia Malouff, manager; Penny 
Lefferts, Barbara Smith, Siri Wheeler. Order Processing: Megan Sangster, manager; Nancy Brown, 
Barbara Lowe, Dawn Teixeira, Marylou T hompson. Data Entry: Carole Ando, manager; Bonnie 
Beardsley, MaryLynn Beardsley, Margaret Fainer, Madelaine Frengs, Gina Pabis, Andrea 
Shorrock, Denise lor. Distribution: Paul Seipold, manager; David Blasko, Michael Capalbo, James 
Chappuis, Mary Ann Costagliola, Maureen Flynn, Linnea Ingram, Frederick Monnes, 
Marcia Pelillo, Alice Saxton, Astor Taylor. Purchasing & Facilities: William Schappert, 
manager; Christopher Myers, Lois Beck, Cynthia Carroll, Beatrix Vangor, Charles Hollis, Robert 
Weinstein, Arthur Williams, Susan Nerich, Oscar Carranza, John Dziadik. Cafeteria: Donna 
Freeman, managerj Geraldine Benno, NonnaÆ Jean Taylor. Data Processing: Robert Peters, MIS 
director; Brendan Bowe, Arthur Caron, Gabriel Dunn, Roger Seliga. PC Systems: Heidi 
Waldkirch, manager; Robert Nielsen, J. Larry Kinnear, Rebecca Fanning, Laurie Yeager. 
6 
manager; Linda Ballerini. Christine Lincoln. Accounting: 
Wayne Reynolds, controller; Patrick Lamontagne, manager; Jeffrey Sherman, Mary Sullivan, 
Andrea Henchcliffe, Carol Diehm, Dorothy Blasko, Susan Burke, Lawrence Rice, Gayle 
Hammond, Karen Lewis, Lydia Krikorian, Elaine Yamin. Corporate Design: Susan Edelman, 
director; Robert Olah, Patricia Marmo. Corporate Art: Mary Terrizzi, manager; Henry Roth, Amy 
Bernard, Catherine Cassidy, Jodie Delohery. Promotion: Philip Allard, manager; D. J. Arneson, 
Wendy Bowes, Christopher Casey, Julia Brine, Mary Beth Cleary, Francesca Arminio. 
Manufacturing: Kathleen Davis, director, Joanne Bisson. Prepress: Austin Starbird, manager; 
Robert Marsala, Patricia Sigetti, Deborah Cooper, Richard Booth, William Bivona, Mark 
Coleman, William Godfrey, Joseph Peuahai, Stephen Roma, Chansam Thammavongsa, Lisa 
DeFeo, Margot Knorr Mancini, W. Kathy Martin, Monica Murphy. Print Production: Dee 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 7 ---
Funny thing about boiling 
colander. We then added a 
Jomething. Once it:! done, 
nOI1Aick IlerJlon, 
a lifetime 
you 'Ile got al! that hot water to get riJ of 
limited warranty, and an ea..!y way to find 
1 " \ 
I r, 
At Rellere, thi! got lid thinking. Since we belielle 
. I ',' 
them al!: .limply cal! 1-800-999-5456 for the 
Finally, A Pot Th !1"fHelps You Handle 
cooking a meal Jhould be 
. , 
department Jtore neareJt you. 
The StrainilOf Cooking. 
eating it, we decided to 
,1 I I 
At Revere, Ollr goal i! to make your life in the 
deJign an 
entire line of cookware, 
E\:cet,'" and a ,Jtockpot ill particlllalj that letJ you 
do both. We galle the lid a dpecial -t:::it-in 
Jtrainer .10 you can drain off water without a 
/ I 
I \Ià 1\11 
'f. r I) 
" 
. 
kitchen eaJie,: 
REVERE 
is a registered lrademar1!. and eXCEL 
is a Irademaf1( 01 Revere Ware Corp. 
CI995 Revere Ware Corp.

--- Page 8 ---
Peachy Pork Picante 
Coat one pound cubed boneless 
pork loin with taco seasoning, 
brown in a little oil in a skinet. 
Add an 8-ounce jar of salsa and 
4 tablespoons peach preserves 
to skillet sti r to mix well, cover 
and lower heat Simmer gently 
for 15 minutes. Preparation TIme: 
25 minutes. Serves four. 
Nutrimt Infonnation, Approximatdy, 
prr Srrving: Calori(5: 263, Protein: 24 gm., 
Fat: 9 gm., Sodium: 762 mg., 
ClJOI(5trrol: 70 mg. 
Nutrimt analysis done by The Food 
Proassor II Diet Analysis Software. 
Pork data from USDA 
Handbook 8-10 (/99/J. 
Try slirjrying pork SITips wilh some sesame oil and 
julienne veggies for an orimlal-style dish. 
Pork is more than you remember. 
Cut up some boneless pork loin, and the options are endless. 
Slice strips for stir-fry or fajitas. cut cubes for kabobs or a quick stew. 
Go wild with fruits. vegetables. sauces and condiments.

--- Page 9 ---
Boneless pork--chops, strips, cubes--absorbs flavor 
or a marinade in just 3D minutes. 
PorI< Piccata Sandwiches 
Coat 4 pork loin cutlets well 
with lemon pepper. Heat butter 
to sizzling in non-stick skillet. 
Brown cutlets quickly on both sides. 
Place cutltts on sandwich buns; serve 
with lemon wedges and sliced 
lorna" Preparation Time: 
15 minull$. Serves four. 
TASTE 
\NHAT'S 
NEXT 
ß .. The Other White Meat .. 
You don't even need a recipe, though these will get you started. 
Think of them as "blueprints" and take it from there! 
Pork will go as far as your imagination. 
Nutrimt Information, Approximatrly, 
ptr Srrving: (alorus: 341, Protrin: 3 I gm., 
Fat: /0 gm., Sodium: 369 mg., 
C11O/lStcrot: 85 mg. 
Nutrimt analysis dont by TIl( Food 
ProctSsor II Dirt Analysis Soft wart. 
Pork data from USDA 
Handbook 8-/0 (J 99/). 
Pork and fntit are a natural pair. Try simmering cutlets in your favorite jam, mixed with 11 little vinegar or water. 
For recipes, send a self-addressed, stamped, business-size envelope to: Recipes-Ad, Box 10383, Des Moines, IA 50306. 
America's Pork Producers ©1995 National Pork Producers Council In cooperation With the National Pork Board.

--- Page 10 ---
Q&A 
Have a question of general interest 
about cooking ? Send it to Fine Cooking, 
PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-
5506, and we'll try to find a cooking 
professional with the answer. 
SALTED, NOT SALTY, WATER 
How much salt is "salted water?" 
-Robert Kinnison, 
Las Vegas, NY 
Molly S tevens replies: Salted water is 
essential for cooking pasta and vege­
tables. Too little salt will result in exces­
sively bland foods, and too much will 
overwhelm and mask flavors, but the 
proper proportion will heighten the taste 
of the food and improve its texture. The 
amount of salt will vary somewhat de­
pending on the type of salt you use and 
on your personal tastes. Try adding salt 
until the water tastes close to sea 
water--only mildly salty. 
Ordinary table salt is saltier than the 
kosher salt preferred by many cooks. A 
safe guideline is 1 teaspoon table salt (or 
1 Yz teaspoons kosher salt) per quart of 
water. When cooking pasta, some chefs 
recommend adding salt in proportion to 
the amount of pasta. In this case, use a 
scant teaspoon table salt (or 1 Y4 tea­
spoons kosher salt) per 8 ounces of pasta. 
A good shortcut for measuring salt is 
to first measure a teaspoon and pour it 
into your cupped hand. Make a mental 
note of how full your hand is. Next time, 
simply measure the salt with your hand. 
Most hands hold 1 to 1 Yz teaspoons. 
The measurement of salt for salted 
cooking water need not be exact, and it's 
more important for some foods than for 
others. Always cook pasta in well-salted 
water; tender vegetables do well with 
little salt. Use less salt for long-cooking 
vegetables, because the salt content will 
concentrate as water evaporates. 
Molly Stevens is a chef/instructor at the New 
England Culinary Institute in Essex, Vermont. 
HOW TO MAKE DARK G RAVY 
How do you get a dark gravy? 
-John Sneider, 
Asheville, NC 
Priscilla Martel replies: Gravy has three 
elements, all of which can contribute to 
color: liquid (stock, water, wine or any 
10 
combination of these) ; a thickener; 
and-for best results-the natural juices 
of the meat that the gravy will be served 
with. Pan juices from roasted meat or 
poultry and the caramelized crust in the 
roasting pan are perfect for making a fla­
vorful sauce. The longer meat juices 
cook, the darker they become. "Dark" 
doesn't mean "burned," however; pan 
juices should be watched for scorching. 
Stock is a good color source. If you use 
a hot oven to brown the bones and vege­
tables you use in your stock, you'll get 
rich, dark results. If you don't have stock 
on hand, you can simmer water (and a 
little wine, if you like) and add a charred 
onion to the liquid. The onion will add 
color and flavor to the liquid. (To char 
an onion, cut it in half horizontally and 
put it, cut side down, in a dry cast-iron 
skillet over high heat for about five min­
utes.) Let the liquid simmer for at least 
twenty minutes before straining. 
You can also brown the flour you'll use 
to thicken the gravy. To do this, spread 
half a cup of flour on a baking sheet and 
toast it in a 450°F oven, checking it every 
five minutes to make sure it browns 
evenly. Be careful not to let the flour 
bum or you'll ruin the taste of the gravy. 
You also can make dark gravy with 
unbrowned flour by making a dark roux. 
A roux is a thickener made from equal 
amounts of fat and flour. Heat the fat, 
add the flour, and cook over medium 
heat, stirring constantly until the roux 
becomes a deep nut brown. This roux 
will give gravy color and a deep, nutty fla­
vor, but it won't thicken quite as well as a 
roux in which the flour hasn't been 
cooked as much. 
To make a classic meat gravy, remove 
as much fat as you can from the meat's 
roasting pan. Then set the roasting pan 
on the stove over medium heat (be sure 
to use a heavy-duty pan) and sprinkle 
some browned flour over the pan juices. 
Stir vigorously to combine and loosen 
any browned bits. Still stirring, add a 
little hot liquid to deglaze the pan. The 
gravy will thicken immediately. Contin­
ue stirring and adding liquid until the 
gravy reaches the correct consistency. 
You also can produce a clear, dark 
gravy without flour by simmering the 
charred onion with stock and pan juices. 
Strain the liquid and use cornstarch to 
thicken it, or reduce the strained liquid 
until it reaches the proper consistency. 
Priscilla Martel is a food writer and the 
former chef at Restaurant du Village in 
Chester, Connecticut. 
WHAT TO DO WITH S H I S O ? 
1've grown some green shiso and need 
some recipes in which to use it. Do you 
have any suggestions? 
-Barbara Harley, 
Laguna Beach, CA 
S teven Pe tusevsky replies: Shiso is a 
popular herb in Japanese cooking. Al­
though shiso belongs to the same family 
as mint and basil, it smells completely dif­
ferent. You can use shiso leaves-as well 
as the buds, flowers, and seeds-as a gar­
nish or a condiment. Shiso leaves are high 
in iron and calcium and help build blood 
hemoglobin. Look to Japanese cookbooks 
for suggested recipes. Here's one of my 
recipes that uses shiso leaves. I use it to 
dress vegetables and strong salad greens. 
SHISO VINAIGRETTE 
Yields about 13,/.j cups. 
l-1 cup white miso 
2 cloves garlic, minced 
1 tsp. minced fresh ginger 
1 Tbs. shiso paste or pureed shiso leaves 
1 Tbs. dark sesame oil 
2 Tbs. brown-rice or rice-wine vinegar 
1 Y4 cup water 
1 Tbs. sugar 
2 tsp. hot chile paste with garlic (optional) 
Combine all the ingredients well in a blender 
or a food processor. 
Steven Petusevsky is the director of creative 
food development for The Unicorn Village 
& Restaurant Marketplace in Aventura, 
Florida. 
CROSS-CULTU RAL SAFETY OF 
TROPICAL OILS 
Why are tropical oils such "no-nos" in 
the United States, when in "third­
world" countries, coconut and palm oils 
are the oils of choice? 
-Bill Moran 
San Diego, TX 
Mary Abbot Hess replies: For a long 
time, American manufacturers were 
fond of using coconut, palm, and other 
tropical oils in packaged foods because 
these oils help maintain crispness longer 
than other oils. But with America's 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 11 ---
Introducing direct from Europe ... a breakthrough in cookware. 
Imagine prepʀg roasts, chops, chicken, even 
stir-fries without messy spaters. Imagine these dishes moist 
and juicy on the inside yet crispy and browned to perfection on the outside. 
secret is in Kitchen Joy's unique heat-resistant glass dome design which: 
• Retains and reflects heat for fast, more energy 
efficient cooking at lower temperatures. 
• Traps spatters and condensation in the 
patented drip-stop base. 
• Creates a turbo-vent channel which 
optimizes browning. 
• Reduces the shrinkage and drying 
that often occur during frying. 
KITCHEN JOY adapts to fit most standard pots and pans 9ُ to 11 inches in 
diameter, can be used in the oven as well as on stovetops, and is dishwasher safe. 
No more soggy food. 
(Not suitable for microwave ovens). 
3O-Day FREE TrIal Offer 
Our Unconditional Guarantee 
We want you to be completely happy with your Kitchen 
Joy Crispy Cover, so our guarantee is simply this: If you 
are not satisfied with this purchase after your 3O-day 
FREE trial, for any reason, just return it to us for a full 
refund or credit to your credit card. 
CALL TOLL-FREE 1-800-221-1688 
8 
to place your order by credit card 
Monday- Friday 9-5 Eastern Time 
Kitchen Joy 
149 Hampton Road, Dept. F 
Southampton, NY 11968 
A quality product from the House of Boerner, 
makers of the famous Boerner V-Slicer. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
r----------------------------
Kitchen Joy ·149 Hampton Road, Dept. F, Southhampton, New York 11968 
YES! I want to order the innovative Kitchen Joy Crispy Cover 
at the Special Introductory price of $49.95 plus $4.90 Shipping & Handling. I wish to be 
billed in the manner indicated below. If I am not completely satisfied, I may return the 
Kitchen Joy Crispy Cover within 30 days and receive a full refund. Please allow 4 
weeks for delivery. (New York Residents, add applicable sales tax.) 
o I enclose check or money order payable to Kitchen Joy 
Please charge to my credit card: 0 VISA 0 MasterCard 0 Amex 0 Discover 
Account # 
________ 
Expires ______ _ 
Signature 
Phone # ( __ ) ______ _ 
Name ______________________ _ 
Street ______________________ _ 
City 
State 
Zip _____ _ 
L __________________________________ 
਺ 
1 1

--- Page 12 ---
Q&A 
burgeoning awareness of restricting 
dietary fats, that rationale isn't enough, 
because the use of tropical oils has been 
shown to raise cholesterol levels. Also, it 
isn't difficult to make substitutions when 
unsaturated oils (canola, for example) 
are readily available. 
When it comes to using tropical oils 
in underdeveloped nations, the popula­
tion often lacks the option of "healthier" 
oils-or the concern about using satu­
rated fats. In short, they don't care about 
it as much as we do because they can't or 
don't have to. Since they usually burn 
tropical oils' fat calories as part of their 
daily diet (rather than storing those calo­
ries as fat) , their blood fats are at much 
less risk. The diet and exercise patterns 
of people in third-world nations are often 
healthier than our own. 
Mary Abbot Hess, a registered dietitian, is 
the author of The Healthy Gourmet. She is 
the vice chairman of the American Institute 
of Wine & Food and the president of Hess & 
Hunt, a nutrition communications firm in 
Winnetka, Illinois. 
FAT-FREE COOKIES AT HOME 
Fat-free cookies are on store shelves; 
can I make them at home? 
-Glenn Wehtje, 
Aubum,AL 
Amy Cotler replies: Fat-free cookies can 
be a challenge; the trick is finding a way to 
replace the satisfying mouth-feel that but­
ter provides. Applesauce and prune puree 
are popular fat replacers in home-baked 
sweets. These products can't be substi­
tuted one-to-one for butter, but they're 
used in many low-fat cookie recipes. 
Meringue cookies are another option; 
these egg-white-based sweets look sump­
tuous and have satisfyingly gooey centers, 
but they're absolutely fat-free. Since but­
ter is the ingredient that gives cookies 
crispness, it's easier to find recipes for soft 
and chewy fat-free cookies than for ones 
that are crisp. If you crave crisp cookies, 
remember that cookies are inherently 
small portions; one cookie doesn't contain 
many fat grams. 
A good recipe source is Have Your Cake 
and Eat It Too-200 Luscious Low-Fat 
Cakes, Pies, Cookies, Puddings, and Other 
Desserts You Thought You Would Never Eat 
Again, by Susan Purdy (Morrow, 1993). 
Amy Cotler works as a spa chef and teaches 
at Peter Kump's New York Cooking School. 
CLEAN I N G DI SCOLORED 
ALU M I N U M COOKWARE 
The water from our well has a lot of 
iron and is very hard, even with an iron 
filter and a water softener. When I boil 
water in aluminum cookware, a black 
discoloration is left on the sides and bot­
tom of the pot. Is there an easy way to 
clean this discoloration? 
-Walter Woolard, 
Greenfield, IN 
Nancy Pollard replies: Cream of tartar is 
your best bet for cleaning aluminum dis­
colored by hard water. You can add a 
tablespoon per quart of water and boil 
the water in the discolored pot for ten 
minutes, or you can combine cream of 
tartar and water to make a paste and use 
For additional information on the complete Chefwear line of professional culinary pants, jackets, aprons, 
hats, shirts, shorts, vests, and ties or to receive our latest, four color catalogue, call toll free 1-800-568-2433. 
!ll'" Chefweal' 
New l'ork CheJs left 10 'iglll: Jonathan Waxman, A"k Reslauranls; Anne Rosenzweig, Arcadia; Bobby Flay, Mesa Grill and Bolo; 
Sarabeth Levme, Sarabeth's; David Burke, Pari, Avenue CaJe; Stephanie Pietromonaco and RIchard Pietromonaco, SJuzzi. 
The 1001, that wails!

--- Page 13 ---
GO 
PROFESSIONAL 
CALIFORNIA 
CULINARY 
ACADEMY 
625 Polk Street San Francisco, CA 94102 
• 
Full-time 16 month Culinary Arts AOS 
degree program. 
• 
30-week Baking and Pastry Arts 
Certificate program. 
• Hands-on culinary experience. 
• 
International Chef/Instructors. 
• 
Financial Aid available to those who 
qualify. 
• 
Placement service for graduates. 
• Accredited by the ACFEI and ACCSCT. 
• Housing Services. 
l-BOO-BAY-CHEF 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Just In Time For Easter! 
Purveyors to Americas I 
finest chefs North Country 
offers our award winning ham at substantial 
savings to new customers only. Fully cooked, our 
ham is maple cured and smoked over a f,re of 
corn cob and maple. One taste will tell why chefs 
prefer North Country and 
why you will too! 
ÝÞ C91mUV 
FREE Jlb.of 
N. 
appl
ewood 
smoked 
._ .َ
 
bacon with every order. SMOKE OUSE 
'Plus Shipping & Handling HOD 
CALL TOLL FREE 
1-800-258-4304 
p.o. Box 1415' Claremont, NH 03743-1415 
Savor the best new wines 
from California's 
"undiscovered" wineries. 
When you subscribe, you will 
receive monthly two different 
bottles of premium "limited 
availability" wines from one of 
California's 'undiscovered' 
wineries. Our wine taster scours 
the California vineyards to find 
the best new small wineries that 
are producing outstanding quality 
wines in limited quantities. You 
will also receive our exclusive 
newsletter, introducing you to the 
wines and their winery. 
Additional quantity orders 
at discount prices. 
Gift subscriptions available. 
Only $26.50 per month 
delivered to your home or office 
You may cancel anytime 
"Your direct connection to the 
Winemakers of California" 
Special Offer: for the readers of Fine 
Cooking 3 bottles for the price of 2 in 
your first shipment. plus an additional 
gift when you mention this ad. 
1 800 858 WINE 
(9463) 
Visa - MC - Discover 
Call 24 Hours 
13

--- Page 14 ---
Ü
FINE FÛ
OOD 
FROਹf 
FR ANCE 
" 
The talking sto pped after the first bite. The 
of Maille's 
authentic French f lavor wa s exhilarating. It wa s the perfect Dijon. " ,.,ਸٍ O"V' 
Crust E. Baguette

--- Page 15 ---
it in conjunction with a scrub brush. 
Your county's water service may be 
able to analyze your water or put you in 
touch with a metallurgist who can ex­
plain exactly what is making your water 
so hard. 
Nancy Pollard is the owner of La Cuisine 
Cookware, a store in Alexandria, Virginia. 
KEEPING AN EDGE ON KNIVES 
I have a terrible time keeping my knives 
sharp, and I've noticed that they make 
a scraping sound on plastic boards. 
Are wooden boards better for keeping 
knives sharp? 
-Sharon Howard, 
Royal Oak, MI 
Jack Saunders replies: Both plastic and 
wooden boards can be appropriate cut­
ting surfaces. While I prefer using a well­
maintained board of fine maple, a 
medium-density plastic cutting board­
one that shows the scrapes and scratches 
of cutting-also works well. Plastic 
boards that are thin, hard, and don't show 
wear will dull your knife because they're 
as hard as or harder than the knife itself 
Jack Saunders is the director of marketing 
for Lamson & Goodnow, a knife manufac­
turer in Shelburne Falls, Massachusetts. 
WHEN THE TOFFEE BREAKS 
I make many batches of English toffee, 
but last year I ran into a problem. Four 
batches---one after another---were 
ruined when, upon reaching 260°F, the 
butter separated from the sugar and I 
couldn't get it to recombine. No factors 
were different from when I created my 
successful batches. I've asked food pro­
fessionals, but no one seems to know 
what happened, although some said 
they'd had the same experience. Can you 
tell me why this happens so I can avoid a 
disappointing and costly reoccurrence? 
-R.M. Wiseman, 
San Diego, CA 
Mark G ray replies: It's difficult to know 
exactly what went wrong, but here are a 
few possibilities: 
Q&A 
• There's too much water in your butter. 
Water can make butter-and-sugar syrups 
break. If you use a generic brand of butter 
or salted butter, you may be using a prod­
uct with too much water and not enough 
butter solids. Make sure you use a high­
quality butter with a high percentage of 
butter solids. 
• You did n't cook the syrup long 
enough. Sometimes the syrup will seem 
to break just before it reaches the soft 
crack stage (270°F) . Cook the syrup just 
until it reaches 270° and take it off the 
heat immediately. (Watch the heat 
closely-the syrup's temperature tends 
to "shoot" between 260° and 265°.) 
When the syrup is off the heat, stir it 
slowly to recombine. At this point, every­
thing should pour out smoothly. 
• When all else fails, make caramel 
sauce. Even if your toffee utterly fails to 
behave, don't throw it out. Add milk, 
cream, or half-and-half to create the 
world's best caramel sauce. 
Mark Gray is a confectioner for New World 
Chocolates in Asheville, North Carolina . • 
FOR PASTA LOVERS 
(Jjourm8t ɽ ϟ 
? ٌ
 
ي 
ɾ 
Ϡϡnth e)\ 
'0 Be 'he Best, 
Study With 'he Best. 
Unique Gourmet Flavors/ 
Shapes Selected Monthly 
• 
Gourmet / Kosher / Health 
even Pet·Tuccine Gift Boxes 
1·800·6·PASTA·1 • 
Master Chel Recipes 
'FREE Gift 
• $29.95 + $5 S.H. (Min. 1 Month) 
Perfect Pasta for a Perfect Gift • 
Visa I Mastercard 
At last - creative packag i ng 
that does justice to your gifts of food 
eVYlve %& VYle't5 
GIFT PACKAGING for the HOME GOURMET 
.... ɂ ........... ɂ .. 
, ...... ً .. ى ........ , 
For a free catalog, please call or write Embellishments: 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Post Office Box 1506 
Cleveland, Mississippi 38732 
1800600 6885 
• Olympic Award Winning Chef-Instructors 
• American Culinary Federation Accredited 
I8-Month Degree Program in both Culinary 
Arts & Pastry Arts • Restaurant Management 
• Financial Aid If Qualified • Lifetime, 
Worldwide Graduate Employment Services 
1-800-844-1354 
KLM Sulivan Colege's 
. ÙÚ National Center For 
ɿ(J 
Hospitality Studies 
3101 Bardstown Road· Louisville, KY 40205 
15

--- Page 16 ---
FJ" "W""r'1 ,..... i'
nnL'
l\.
 
TTl\. Tf::: 
r 
UUNTO,. 
F F • "an FINE 
E
NING 
ģ 1 
Si'" 
Climbing Roses • Pots • Digging Methods • Annuals 
Taunton 
MAGAZIN ES 
for fellow enthusiasts 
Free Trial Issue 
To order, call 
1-800-888-8286 
and ask for 
operator 166. 
FROM THE PUBLISHERS OF 
FINE COOKING 
Your joy of gardening can match your love of cooking. 
Rich soil ... new bulbs ... a cutting from a friend. Plants filled 
with color. .. flowering shrubs at their peak. New plans for next 
year ... a small pond ... pots of blossoms ... a shade garden 
sanctuary. These are your dreams. And, you wonder, why 
can't it always be like this? 
We believe it can. And Fine Gardening 
magazine shows you how. 
F
ulfill 
your vision of gardening at its best ... find inspiration ... 
proven ideas ... and much, much more. 
• Garden designers show you how to create 
stunning landscapes. 
• Plant and flower specialists give you expert tips ... 
and the encouragement to experiment. 
• Experts from across the country share their 
successful gardening techniques. 
• Soil, seed and bulb authorities help you get more 
from your garden. 
Fellow gardeners exchange "over-the-garden-fence» advice. 
Coast to coast, indoors or out, all year long ... you'll garden better 
and enjoy it more with America's finest gardening resource­
Fine Gardening.

--- Page 17 ---
50 Years of 
Singing The Blues! 
For 50 years Famous May tag Blue Cheese 
has been a cheese lover's delight. Today, 
each wheel is still made by hand and cave 
aged to perfection. Maytag Blue is recognized 
among the world's finest cheeses. And with 
the same dedication to quality, we offer a 
variety of other fine cheeses. 
2 1b wheel of Maytag Blue @ $19.25 each 
4 Ib wheel of Maytag Blue @ $35.75 each 
(Plus $5.00 delivery per address) 
?l!ar1ml Dairy Fanns 
Dept. 163 • 
P.O. Box 806 • 
Newton, IA 50208 
515-792-1133 
Toll Free:1-800-247-2458 
Fax: 515-792-1567 
Discover, Visa, M/C • Ask for a Free catalog 
Protect Your Issues 
of Fine Cooking 
SLIPCASES FOR YOUR BACK ISSUES. 
Bound in red leatherette and embossed in gold, 
each case holds up to ten issues of Fine Cooking, 
and costs $8.95 (save: buy 3 for $24.95, 6 for 
$45.95). Add $1.50/case for p&h. Outside the 
continental U.S., including AI( and HI, add $3.50 
each (U.S. funds only). PA residents add 7% sales 
tax. Send your order and payment to the address 
below, or call toll free, 1-800-825-6690, and use 
your credit card (minimum $15). 
Jesse Jones lnd., Dept. 95 FC, 499 E. Erie Ave., 
Philadelphia, PA 19134. (No P.O. boxes, please) 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
A SPECIAL OFFER TO CELEBRATE 
THE 100m ANNIVERSARY OF LE CORDON BLEU 
THE VIDEOS 
Thanks to this remarkable series of videos, now you can recreate the 
extraordinill)' cuisine of France right in your kitchen-with the world· 
renowned chefs ofLe Cordon Bleu's famed teaching staff as your 
perso
nal 
instructors. 
During the course of each exciting, 45-minute video, you1l discover the 
secrets of Le Cordon Bleu's most coveted rteipes ... watch some of France's 
foremost chefs prepare incredible culinill)' specialities ... and see close·up 
the classic techniques and practical methods you need to prepare a 
fabulous assortment of dishes from an elegant dinner for two to a 
memorable holiday feast 
Whether you're a professional chef, a serious amateur or looking for the 
perfect 
gift for you favorite cook, you1l find the videos-and the s
peciali
ties 
you1l learn to create-truly magnillque! 
SINGLE VIDEOS $24.95 ($3.00 SjH ea.) 
DISPLAY SET-8 TAPES + COOKBOOK 
$198.60 (5% shipping) 
CALL 800/888·4046 
THE COOKBOOK 
One hundred classic recipes to celebrate one hundred years of the 
greatest name in French cooking. The ultimate collection of recipes . 
traditional and modern . 
from the world·renowned cooking school Le 
Cordon Bleu. Professional chefs reveal the secrets of the skills behind 
the acclaimed Le Cordon Bleu name. More than 200 color photographs 
show the finished dishes · and the 
techni
ques of French cooking. 
CLASSIC FRENCH COOKBOOK 
A $24.95 value comes Free with this offer. 
CALL 800/888-4046 
LIMITED OFFER 
To receive complete 
Video Library and 111e Classic 
French Cookbook'­
CALL TODAY 
$198%!l 
+ 5% shipping 
GDfBFI 
fin 
mOKING· 
There are plenty of 
magazines about food, 
now there's one about 
cooking. 
A year's subscription to Fine Cooking gives you six colorful issues brimming with in­
depth cooking information-straight from your fellow cooks. Just take a look through 
this issue and I'm sure you'll agree-Fine Cooking is your new source for fresh ideas, 
sound techniques and good advice. 6 issues, $26 a year (outside the U.S. $32). If at any 
time you aren't satisfied with Fine Cooking, we'll gladly refund your money in full. 
Subscribe Today, Risk Free. 
To order, call toll free 1-800-888-8286 and ask for operator 70. 
The Taunton Press, 63 S. Main St., P.O. Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506 
17

--- Page 18 ---
NOTES 
Real Demi7Glace in a Jar 
It's always the same dilemma. You know 
that rich, concentrated homemade veal 
demi-glace will produce fabulous sauces, 
soups, and braises, but who has the time 
to shop, chop, simmer, skim, strain, and 
reduce? Yet the alternatives to home­
made are never up to snuff. Happily, 
there's a new product that resolves the 
dilemma deliciously. 
Demi-Glace Gold has all the elements 
of the labor-intensive original and con­
tains no preservatives or artificial ingre­
dients. It is quite simply brown veal stock, 
with a little flour as a binder, reduced to a 
gelatinous, firm consistency. It has a low 
moisture content and high acidity (from 
tomato and red wine) , so unopened, it 
has an 18-month unrefrigerated shelf life. 
The product can be used in three forms­
concentrated as a meat glaze (glace de 
viande), reconstituted to make a rich 
sauce base, or diluted to use as a stock. 
When I opened the jar, the deep, rich 
aroma and silky, sticky texture announced 
that Demi-Glace Gold was in a league 
above any existing ready-made sauce base. 
So rather than compare it to other instant 
sauce bases, I decided to compare it to a 
homemade demi-glace. To use Demi­
Glace Gold, add water and simmer while 
whisking for about six minutes. The rec­
ommended water-to-product ratio is 3:1, 
which I found to be too concentrated. It 
made a forcefully beefy sauce that left a 
gluey film in my mouth. A S: 1 ratio pro­
duced a more balanced sauce base with a 
18 
bright shine and silky texture 
that wasn't excessively thick 
after simmering. It was, in fact, 
smoother and clearer than 
homemade (even after strain­
ing the homemade through a 
very fine sieve). Its syrupy con­
sistency and mahogany color 
were flawless, and it delivered 
a deep, rich meaty flavor. 
My only complaint was that 
several of the "chef-tasters" I 
enlisted detected a slightly flat, 
over-reduced flavor typical of 
some bases. But the stuff isn't 
really meant to be used alone 
as a sauce, so I don't consider 
this to be a problem. The slight 
flatness was easily masked by 
pairing the sauce base with as­
sertive seasonings such as wine reductions, 
acid ingredients, or vivid spices. A col­
league worked wonders with a fruity, heady 
red wine and port reduction; a white wine 
and shallot reduction, however, was too 
delicate to stand up to the forceful Demi­
Glace Gold. 
I decided to test Demi-Glace Gold on 
some classic French sauces. A sauce Robert, 
using a good dose of Dijon mustard, was 
delicious, as was a wild mushroom sauce 
and a simple but spicy sauce au poivre with 
lots of cracked black pepper. I also had fan­
tastic success using the diluted product for 
deglazing when making a quick pan sauce 
and as a braising liquid to create deeper fla­
vors. Demi-Glace Gold can also be used 
to enrich the flavor of grains-rice, barley, 
kasha-by adding a teaspoon per cup of 
grain to the water during cooking. 
As a soup base, two ounces made a 
quart of richly flavored broth; I added fresh 
vegetables and grains, which really came 
to life against a deep background of a well­
made stock. But because there's a little 
flour in it, Demi-Glace Gold is somewhat 
cloudy with a starchy sediment, so it 
doesn't lend itself to delicate preparations. 
I worked with two sizes of Demi-Glace 
Gold-a 1 Y2-ounce "puck" and an 8-
ounce jar. The puck produces enough 
demi-glace to make sauce for four to six 
servings. It's also available in food-service 
quantities of 10- and 50-pound buckets. 
The real beauty of this product is the 
fact that it isn't just for classic sauce­
making. I enjoyed it the most when I 
used it for dishes like an impromptu pan 
sauce or a rice pilaf-everyday dishes 
that I'd never bother to make veal stock 
for, but that taste so much better with it. 
Demi-Glace Gold will soon be available 
in gourmet stores nationwide. To find the 
retailer nearest you, or to order, contact 
More Than Gourmet, 1 15 W Bartges St., 
Akron, OH 443 1 1 ; 800/860-9392. 
-Molly Stevens, chef/instructor, New 
England Culinary Institute, Essex, Vermont 
J liSt Bell Peppers 
Karen and Bill Cox produce very fine 
dried tomatoes called Just Tomatoes. 
Now they're offering Just Bell Peppers, 
dried red and green bell pepper strips. 
The Coxes grow most of the vegetables 
they dry. Any others they need come from 
farms near their home in California's Cen­
tral Valley. They use only hand-picked 
produce and everything is rushed to their 
drying facility to ensure the freshest fla­
vor. Their homemade dehydrator pre­
serves without salt, sulfur, or other preser­
vatives. Bill and Karen like to say their 
products are "the next step from fresh." 
I 
Just Bell Peppers comes in 1- and 8-
ounce packages, containing a mix of red 
and green peppers. We find the green 
bitter and would have preferred a choice 
rather than a mix. Dehydrated raw, with 
the peel intact, the skins are tough and 
unpleasantly chewy, even when recon­
stituted. But the intense bell-pepper 
flavor is quite good. 
To reconstitute the peppers, cover 
with hot water or stock and let stand until 
tender, about 45 minutes. One ounce 
dried yields about four ounces plump pep­
pers. The strained liquid makes a terrific 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 19 ---
The Greens Book 
IT'S NOT ABOUT LETTUCE! 
IT'S ABOUT COUNTRY-BAKED HAM 
stuffed with chard) mustard greens) and garlic; 
TENDER HOMEMADE TORTELLI 
filled with beet greens and cheese) swimming in a walnut-sage sauce; 
VIBRANT GREEN SALADS 
with that perfect balance oj mild) bitter) sweet) and sour. 
FRO M APPETIZERS 
TO D E SSERTS, 
OVER 40 RECIPES 
B R I M M I N G WITH 
THE TASTI EST, 
FRESHEST G R E E N S 
Y I E L D T H E BENEFITS 
OF A B U N DANT, 
H EALT H F U L 
VITA M I N S A N D 
ANTIOXIDANTS. 
The Greens Book-
IT'S ABOUT CABBAGE, KALE, 
COLLARDS, RADICCHIO, ROMAINE, 
SORREL, ENDIVE, ARUGULA, 
MESCLUN, MISTICANZA, 
MACHE, MALLOW, AND MORE! 
AND IT'S BEAUTIFUL. 
Authors Susan Belsinger and Carolyn Dille 
are longtime chefs and food writers 
who have been cooking and experimenting 
with greens for many years. 
COUNTRY-BAKED HAM 
BRUSCHETTA WITH ARUGULA 
AND BALSAM IC TOMATOES 
WATERCRESS SAUCE FOR 
VEGETABLES, FI SH, AND C HI CKEN 
NTERWEAVE PRESS, 201 East Fourth Street, Dept. H5A, Loveland, Colorado 8053 7-5655

--- Page 20 ---
NOTES 
base for soups and stews. We particularly 
like it in chili. 
You don't always have to reconstitute 
the peppers: if there's enough moisture in 
the dish, you can add them straight from 
the bag. They'll taste better, too, when 
plumped with flavorful cooking juices 
instead of water. 
We added the peppers to a black-bean 
salad with just a bit more dressing than 
usual. After 20 minutes, the peppers were 
plump and full of tangy vinaigrette. We 
like to saute Just Bell Peppers with sliced 
onions. The peppers soak up the juices let 
off by the onions. Flavored with cumin and 
fresh coriander, it's delicious! The dried 
peppers are too tough to chop, but they 
can be frozen briefly (about 15 minutes) 
and crumbled onto pizzas, into omelets, or 
added to cheese sandwiches before grilling. 
Look for Just Bell Peppers in specialty 
shops, or call 800/53 7 - 1985 for ordering 
information. 
-Dona and Stuart Tarbour, chef/ 
owners of Kitchen Market and The Bright 
Food Shop, New York City 
Building a Better 
Cookbook Holder 
Any cookbook holder is a better alterna­
tive to setting a prized recipe collection in 
a puddle on the counter and holding the 
page down with a can of soup. Still, most 
make page-turning a two-handed task, re­
quiring you to remove the book, turn the 
page, and replace the book in the holder 
while you try not to smear cookie dough 
across the pages. Also, the awkward shape 
of most book holders makes them difficult 
C A R E E R C O O K I N G C L A S S E S 
"The tr
ainin
g
 
at Peter Kump's is excellent ... " 
" ... the school's students are well prepared for work in a 
professional kitchen. Indeed, the highest compliment 
that I can pay is that my staff includes several graduates." 
David Waituck, Chef-Owner 
Chanterele, Manhatan 
**** The New York Times 
"Extraordinary," Zagat Survey 1994 
We couldn't have said it better ourselves. 
At Peter Kump's New York Cooking School we're getting 
people ready for top-level careers - and because we require 
two years of college for admission, we can do it 
in only 20 weeks. 
Who are we? One of the most prestigious cook­
ing schools in the world. Our apprenticeship program 
boasts placement in the highest caliber establishments 
here and abroad. Our graduates work in the most CAL'U"'Vo; 
restaurants and pastry shops in the country. 
Start your career at the top. For information about our 
career courses in the Culinary Arts and Pastry & 
Baking Arts, or to learn about our school courses 
for home cooks, call 
(800) 522-4610 
20 
Clear Solutions of West Brattleboro, Ver­
mont, has come up with a beautifully 
simple answer to the book-holder problem. 
Instead of a single piece of formed plas­
tic, Clear Solutions uses a hinge to attach 
a sheet of Plexiglas to a hardwood base. 
The hinge allows you to flip down the 
Plexiglas and turn pages with one hand 
while s
tirrin
g a sauce with the other. It also 
lets the holder fold flat for easy storage. 
The grooved wooden base holds a separate 
back support that can be adjusted to dif­
ferent thicknesses, so you can hold open 
this issue of Fine Cooking as easily as your 
copy of Larousse Gastr
onom
ifJue. The one 
drawback is that the Plexiglas front isn't 
glare proof, so recipes can be difficult to 
read. I know one smart cook who solved 
that problem by having her holder fitted 
with a piece of nonglare glass. 
Clear Solutions guarantees the holder 
against breakage for one year. It costs 
about $25 at cookware stores nationwide. 
For information about where to find one 
in your area, call 800/257 -4550. 
-Jan Newberry, Fine Cooking • 
You WON'T FIND 
THIS GREAT C
HARD
ONNAY 
ANYwH
ERE ELSE! 
Our newly released 1993 Preston Ranch Chardonnay 
is available exclusively from the winery . . . for just 
$96 a case. The last six vintages of Preston Ranch 
Chardonnay have been Gold Medal winners, so this 
one won't last long! Order today and we'U deliver to 
your home or office. Satisfaction guaranteed. 
$10 INTRODUCTORY OFFER 
As an introduction to Windsor's Preston Ranch 
Chardonnay, order one bottle - one time only­
for only $10. 
In 1993, our winemaker received the Andre 
T chelistcheff "W memaker of the Year" award !Tom 
&nAppetitmagazine. One taste of this classic 
Chardonnay and you'll understand why. 
TO ORDER, CALL 
800-333-9987 
OFFER EXPIRES 6/30/95 
CA, NY, N), Il .. FL AND OR 
RESIDENTS ONLY 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 21 ---
INSPIRED BY HISTORIC 19TH CENTURY 
RECIPES &DESIGNS 
* * * * 
THE EXCLUSIVE SOURCE 
FOR GOURMET FOODS AND 
HOMEfTABLETOP ACCESSORIES 
FROM THE ROMANTIC ERA 
ɺ 
Write or call for free catalog: 
ɻ 
, THE VICTORIAN CUPBOARD Catalog • 
ɼP.O. Box 1 852, Old Chelsea Station, NY 1011; 4 
Ģ 
1-800-653-8033 
r0r;+ 
VI DALIA® 
ONIONS! 
Hendrix Farms proudly presents this 
year's crop of Vidalia· Sweet Onions! 
Fresh from the field and hand selected. 
order your Vidalias· today and ask for 
a free copy of our spring catalog! 
la-LB. BOX $12.95 
25-LB. BOX 
$29.95 
5Q-LB. BOX 
$54.95 
(Plus $2.95 S&H per address) 
COMMERCIAL ALUMINUM COOKWARE COMPANY. DEPT. 72, P.O. BOX 583, TOLEDO, OHIO 43697 
Chef Clothing Revival': . . 
The Gift For Those Who 
Take Cooking Seriously. 
Peeling like a chef can multiply 
the sheer joy and inspiration of 
serious cooking. And nothing 
makes you feel more like a chef 
than classic, comfortable, kitchen 
wear from Chef Clothing Revival:" 
Designed by Chefs for Chefs®, and 
proven in the great kitchens of the 
world, these garments and acces­
sories make a perfect, 
and greatly appreciated gift for the serious cook in 
your life. Call or write for the complete Chef 
Clothing Revival'" Gift Catalog today. 
1-800-352-2433 
R E V I V A L 12 Dyatt Place, Hackensack, NJ, 07601 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
21

--- Page 22 ---
Tips 
Do you have a clever way to peel 
vegetables, line a cake pan, or keep 
herbs tasting fresh? Share your 
shortcuts and tricks with fellow 
readers by writing to TIps, Fine 
Cooking, PO Box 5506, Newtown, 
CT 06470-5506. We pay for tips 
we publish. 
Peeling Kiwis 
Nothing mars the appearance of sliced 
kiwis more than the evidence of paring 
knife ridges and edges. I have found a 
simpler and less frustrating method using 
I 
/ 
an ordinary teaspoon. To start, cut the 
kiwi in half In one of the halves, insert 
the tip of the shallow spoon between the 
skin and the flesh (see top illustration) . 
Turn the kiwi while pushing the spoon 
gently farther in until you hit the end. Ro­
tate the kiwi completely at least once to 
make sure that all of the skin, except for a 
small spot at the end, is separated. Scoop 
out the emerald flesh, or remove the skin 
by peeling it back like a sock. The skin 
doubles as a convenient handle to hold 
the fruit for slicing (see bottom illustra­
tion) . Repeat with the other half 
-Jurgen Richter, 
Mississauga, ON 
$, - y 
'ͱ਻਼J 
I } 
) 
/ \ 
J __ /
Ø
 
'-../ ਷ 
22 
Cross, Referencing Recipes 
In my recipe file, I keep cards for many 
unusual or infrequently used ingredients 
that might go to waste because I only 
need a small quantity for a recipe­
buttermilk, for example. On that card, 
I've listed several foods with buttermilk 
in it, like pancakes, biscuits, Aunt Helen's 
Ranch Dressing, etc. The card reminds 
me what other recipes I use that call for 
that ingredient. This prompts me to make 
one of those recipes so I can use up the 
remaining quantity. 
-Mary Sullivan, 
Concord, CA 
Versatile Zip,Top Bags 
The most valuable tool in my kitchen, 
without doubt, is a freezer bag with a 
zip top. These heavy-duty bags are 
good for more than just storing foods­
and they're microwave-safe. 
Lightly coat the inside of a gallon-size 
freezer bag with vegetable spray and let 
yeast dough rise in it. Seal the bag and 
simply put the dough in a warm place 
in your kitchen. After the dough has 
doubled, punch it down and shape it as 
the recipe suggests. There's no clean-up 
of messy greased bowls. 
Put chopped chocolate in a bag, seal it 
shut, and put it in hot water for about 
five minutes. Remove from the water, dry 
the bag, and knead it with your hands for 
about a minute. When the chocolate is 
smooth and creamy, snip a small hole in 
the corner of the bag and squeeze the 
chocolate onto cakes, pastries, or bar 
cookies to decorate. You can also pipe 
star shapes, scroll designs, or even sen­
timents such as "Congratulations" or 
"Happy Birthday" on kitchen parch­
ment. When the chocolate hardens, 
gently peel off the designs and use them 
for decoration. 
When filling mini-muffin cups or 
madeleine tins, put the batter in a 
gallon-size bag, seal, and snip a '%-inch 
opening from one corner of the bag. 
Then simply pipe the batter into the 
prepared tins. There are no messy drips 
or batter spills that need to be wiped 
away before baking. 
Also, you can use the gallon-size 
freezer bags to steam green beans and 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 23 ---
asparagus in the microwave. Prep the 
vegetables as described in your recipe. 
Rinse them with cold running water 
and seal the vegetables, with water still 
clinging to them, in the bag. Put the bag 
in the microwave. For 1 to 1 Vz pounds 
of crisp tender green beans or aspara­
gus, I usually microwave at 100% power 
for five to six minutes. Again, there's no 
mess, the kitchen stays cool, and the 
stovetop is free for other chores. 
-Ray L. Overton III, 
The Georgia Lifestyles 
Learning Center, 
Alpharetta, GA 
Smooth Pie Shells 
To keep a pie shell from bubbling up 
when you bake it empty, or "blind," it's a 
good idea to put in a liner of aluminum 
foil and weigh it down. Instead of using 
beans, though, try filling it with pennies 
from the penny jar. Makes cents? 
-John G. Sisson, 
New ¥ork, NY 
C/fu, d/ntUfUE, cM.all 
did {!wwn cR£,×tau'lant 
dmokd {!atftJ; YJau' 
The Perfect Gourmet Gift! It's 
Uniquely Mississippi! 
{!tu×w {!atfi×h 
A NEW cookbook of exciting and 
unusual catfish recipes from this 
gourmet restaurant in the 
Mississippi Delta-
Hard cover that opens Oat $14.95 
0u.'L gOU'Lmd P'IL,. dlt(ix£j. a'l.c.. 
9abuloϞ 
CalJ to order or receive our brochure 
1-800-833-7731 
P.o. Box 540, Indianola, MS 38751 
F
AX
: 601-887-5547 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Testing Artichokes 
When boiling whole artichokes, check 
for done ness by pulling on the top of an 
interior leaf. If the leaf comes free under 
Tips 
the artichoke's weight, then it's done. If it 
needs more coercion to break loose, then 
it needs more cooking. 
-Diane Chesterton, 
Kansas City, MO 
Microwave Proofing 
The microwave is a great place to let 
bread dough rise. Heat a small bowl of 
water in the microwave and leave it 
there. Put the bowl of bread dough in the 
oven and close the door. The hot water 
creates warmth and moisture. If the 
dough is a little dry, leave it uncovered; if 
its texture is perfect, cover it. 
-Theresa Overfield, 
Salt Lake City, UT 
Chinese "Balsamic" 
Vinegar 
I have found that Chinese black vinegar, 
also called Chekiang vinegar, is a good 
substitute for balsamic vinegar. Made 
from fermented rice, this vinegar is dark 
23

--- Page 24 ---
Tips 
and richly flavored like balsamic, but 
slightly less sweet. I prefer Narcissus 
brand made in Yongchun, in the Che­
kiang province, but it's often difficult to 
find. I usually buy Gold-Plum brand 
black vinegar, which in my area costs 
only $ 1 .29 for a 2 1 -ounce bottle. 
-Bill Moran, 
San Diego, TX 
No6Stick Measuring 
When a recipe calls for both solid shorten­
ing and whole eggs or egg whites, use the 
eggs to keep the shortening from stick­
ing to the measuring cup. Break the eggs 
into a measuring cup, swish them around 
to coat the inside of the cup, and then 
transfer them to the mixing bowl or to 
another container. Measure the shorten­
ing as usual in the coated cup. Turn the 
cup over and all the shortening will easily 
slide out. 
-Kathryn H. Adams, 
Birmingham, AL 
Anchoring Kitchen 
Parchment 
Call me a control freak, but I like to be in 
complete control of the baking parch­
ment when I do my baking. There's 
nothing worse than trying to work with 
parchment that slides all over the baking 
sheet because it doesn't quite fit the pan. 
Whenever I make biscotti, cookies, or 
pate a choux (cream puffs) , I use a little of 
the dough or batter to glue the corners 
of the paper to my baking sheet. After 
baking, the paper comes off easily, and 
clean up is a breeze. Isn't that the reason 
they made baking parchment? 
-Eric Hoey, 
San Pedro, CA 
Drying Mushrooms 
Instead of buying expensive wild mush­
rooms in the winter, try drying your own 
while they're in season. With a needle 
and thread, string the mushrooms 
through their stems and hang them up-
side down in a warm and dry room. 
They'll dry out in 3 to 7 days. It's a good 
idea to stick the dried mushrooms in the 
freezer for a day or so to kill any insects 
that may still be on them. 
-Douglas Kreidler, 
Olympic Valley, CA 
Cleaning the Blade 
Here's how to get the last sticky rem­
nants off a food processor blade without 
endangering your fingers or fussing with 
a rubber scraper. First empty the contents 
of the work bowl, but don't worry about 
getting it all. Reassemble the processor 
and pulse the blade several times. The 
remainder of the ingredients will now be 
up against the side of the work bowl­
not on the blade-so you won't have to 
scrape the blade. Take out the blade to 
make it easy to scrape down the sides of 
the work bowl. 
-Georgene Hawkins -Kunz, 
Fircrest, WA 
(Continued on p. 27) 
L O V E T o C O O l ? Cooking with Flowers and Flour 
24 
Start your own proven and profitable 
Home Based Service Business utilizing your 
Creative Cooking abilities. Learn how to start and 
operate a successful Personal Chef Service business 
from the originator and pioneer of the 
Personal Chef Service industry-the USPCA. 
Our Personal Chef Service Business Training System 
includes: 
'STARTER RECIPES 
'FORMS AND CONTRACTS 
'TRAINING MANUAL 
'MARKETING MATERIALS 
'COMPUTER SOFTWARE 
'ONE YEAR TELEPHONE SUPPORT 
CALL FOR YOUR FREE INFORMATION PACKAGE! 
M/C 
1 -800-547 -791 5 
UNITED STATES PERSONAL CHEF ASSOCIATION 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
Listed in Entrepreneur Magazine's 
1993 Business Opportunity Top 500. 
VISA 
by Marie Bonaminio 
Eat Your Centerpiece? 
Why Not? 
Cooking with Flowers and FlOU1; 
a colorful video and recipe booklet. Stuffed 
Gladiolus, The Garden Boucake, Marigold 
Munchies, and morefThe video will show you 
how it's done-fast and easy. Join me in my 
kitchen by ordering OW! $24.95 plus $3.50 
postage (Canadian funds $26.95 plus $3.50) 
check or money order, MC, VISA, AMEX to: 
Cooking with Flowers and Flour 
1105 West 21st Street, Lorain, OH 44052 
or call 1-800-837-3505 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 25 ---
France Awaits You ............ June 1-13, 1995 
Join French born Chef Michel Bouit as he leads chefs 
& gourmets on a culinary adventure to medieval chateaux 
& vineyards of Burgundy; historic cities, local artisans, 
troglodytique villages, markets & 
chateaux of the kings in the Loire 
Valley. Experience gastronomic 
pleasures of 4-star restaurants, 
medieval dinners, degustations & 
more. Call MBI, Inc. at 312-663-5701 . 
Ask about our other culinary tours or 
the "Cooking with the Masters" 
educational series in France. 
• Small Cl
asse
s 
• Hands-on Curriculum 
• Accelerated A.O.S. Degree 
& &::otsd ale 
Culinary 
Institute 
FANCY FOODS GOURMET CLUB 
Gourmet foods you can afford. We have 
smoked salmon and seafood, caviar, pates, 
cheeses, chocolates, gift baskets and more. 
Specials: Irish Smoked Salmon (1.1 Ibs) - $21 
Russian Caviar Sampler - $61 
(1 oz. each Beluga, Ossetra & Sevruga) 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
To order or request a catalog, call 
1-800-835-2246, e.rt_ 17 
o r write 330-E N. Stonestreet Avenue, 
MD 20850. MC/VISA accepted 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
TREAT 
YOURSELF 
TO TIm 
FINEST 
100% 
PURE 
V
ANILLA 
DOUBLE STRENGTH 
Tahitian -sweet exotic floral aroma 
Bourbon -warm, rich, mellow 
Real Mexican -similar to Bourbon but sweeter 
Extracted in the u.s. 
Receive three 2-oz bottles,) one of each 
$19.50 + $4 s h 
50 great recipes + illustrated catalog of 
. 
Cake Decorating, Candy Making 
. 
free with order. 
Fresh Morels 
delivered to your door. 
Mushroom lovers, now is the time for delectable 
fresh morels. This coming morel season promises 
an extraordinary harvest. But it won't last long, so 
call now to place your order. Highest quality. Great 
gift idea. Many other varieties available.Ö 
Call 1-800-88-FUNG I 
Mushroom 01 the Month Club® t\ ġ II 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Cooking Software that 
Makes Sense! 
Let your Macintosh™ power through the "book 
work" of cooking. Zero in on recipes by ingredient 
and many other ways, plan meals, scale recipes 
and create shopping lists at the speed of thought. 
Acclaimed by Cookbook Review as "great 
culinary software"" Mangia! is unconditionally 
guaranteed to delight you . 
Mangia! runs on any modern Macintosh (without 
HyperCard™) and comes with over 300 recipes for 
well under $50. 
llP5TILL 
S O FTWA R E 
1442A Walnut · Berkeley, CA • 94709 
Call 1-800-JOT-DOWN 
to order or leam more. 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
25

--- Page 26 ---
_.--SH ON 
THE VINE ... 
FROM OUR 
HOUSE 
TO YOUR 
HOUSE. 
Greenhouse grown in rich 
sandy soil, our tomatoes 
are sweeter than regular 
tomatoes and their 
extended shelf life makes 
for longer lasting enjoyment. 
Desert Glory's Cocktail 
Tomatoes are harvested by 
hand, carefully packaged and then 
shipped '1resh on the vine" to you. 
60oz.Box 
$1999 
Delivered! 
}ɹtt 1-800-44SALAD 
Desert Glory, P. o. Box 453, Devine, Texas 78016 
Tomatoes shown 
larger than actual size.

--- Page 27 ---
/ 
Washing Lettuce 
Here's a quick way to wash the dirt out of 
"open-ended lettuce," such as red leaf, ro­
maine, and Bibb. Cut a V-shaped wedge 
from the stem end of the lettuce and 
remove the wedge. Holding the bottom of 
the lettuce firmly, run cool water into the 
cut area that's now exposed at the base of 
the lettuce. The water will flow down 
through the layers ofleaves, and will gently 
push the dirt from bottom to top. Because 
you've cu t away the root, the lettuce leaves 
can be peeled away easily. Be sure to check 
for any stubborn dirt that might have 
clung to the ribs before drying the lettuce. 
-Walter]' Morrison III, 
Buffalo, NY 
Sweating Peppers 
To easily peel bell peppers, char the skins 
and then instead of putting them in a 
plastic bag to sweat, put them in a bowl 
and cover immediately with plastic 
wrap. Let the peppers steam for 10 to 
15 minutes. Take them out-the skins 
should slide right off. Pour the pepper 
juices that remain in the bowl into what­
ever you're cooking. 
-Betsy P. Race, 
Euclid, OH 
iPON AL FONSO FOODS] 
HARD TO FIND 
MEXICAN 
CHILES, HERBS, 
SPICES AND 
SEASONINGS. 
SPICY SALSAS 
AND SAUCES, 
MEXICAN 
COOKING 
'---
/ UTENSI LS, ETC. 
Gail $1.00 and receive a catalog, recipes and a $2.00 credit 
for your first order. 
P.O. Box 201988 * Austin, Texas * 78720-1988 Ġ 
Create beautiful gardens. 
This fully indexed, easy-to-use resource contains articles on 
garden design from Fine Gardening 
magazine. The authors 
explain the principles at work in beautiful gardens-and 
how to apply them in your own garden and yard. You'll see 
designs from classic English gardens to graceful Japanese 
motifs-plus real solutions by today's finest designers. 
To order your copy, send $14.95 plus $3 p&h to: 
The Taunton Press, Order Dept., 
P.O. Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
SOFTCOVER, COLOR, 96 PAGES, 
108 PHOTOS, 27 DRAWINGS, 
2 CHARTS, ITEM 070208 
lips 
Halt the Tears 
After crying my way through all the tricks 
in the book for cutting onions, my hus­
band suggested I try goggles. I know I look 
silly in the kitchen with swim goggles on, 
but I wear them from the first slice of 
onion to the last and never shed a tear. 
-Gretchen Allison, chef, 
Duck Soup Inn, 
Friday Harbor, WA 
No6Grit Beet Juice 
After boiling unpeeled beets, you're left 
with a delightfully colored, flavorful liquid, 
which unfortunately contains quite a bit 
of sand. To thoroughly eliminate this grit, 
put a paper coffee filter in a strainer and 
pour the liquid through. If you don't have 
an immediate need for the liquid, freeze it 
and use it later in your stockpot in place of 
water. This method also works for the 
water used to rehydrate dried mushrooms. 
-Laile A. Giansetto, 
Berkeley, CA • 
•••••••••••• 
• 
IF UFE 
• 
• 
HAN
DS 
• 
: 
YOU 
: 
• A 
gfA
ON, • 
• 
MAKE
A
 
• 
: 
SOUFFI2. 
: 
• Sometimes the best way to get • 
• 
ahead is to go back. To school. 
Our unique. 2 year program offers: • 
• • Hands-on culinary training 
• 
• • 7 to 1 student/teacher ratio 
• 
• Paid. personalized internships 
• • Finandal aid for qualified students • 
• • Advanced Placement available • 
• 
• A.O.S. degree in Culinary Arts • 
• NEW: Bachelor's degree program in 
• 
Service and Management 
• 
• • • • • • 
Send for our 
four color .... ... ϝ 
catalog. 
ϣ1+111IwiϥϦ 
• 
250 Main St.. Dept. FC • 
Montpelier. vr 05602-9720 
• 
Telephone (802) 223-6324 • 
•••••••••••• 
Accredited Member, ACCScr 
27

--- Page 28 ---
We've Always Been 
A Wonderful Part Of Your Past.

--- Page 29 ---
Welcome To The Present And The Future. 
Land O'Lakes goodness and quality. Made with tradition, but made for today.

--- Page 30 ---
Big Flavor from 
a Small Bird 
Cornish game hens are 
delicious, versatile, and 
right for any seasonal menu 
BY LUCIA WATSON 
Simply delicious. 
Cornish game hen 
roasted with seasonal 
vegetables and served 
with a lemony sauce 
makes an easy and 
appealing main course 
for a spring menu.

--- Page 31 ---
A t my restaurant, Lucia's, I change the menu 
weekly, adapting to the weather and to what­
ever catches my eye at the farmers' market in Minne­
apolis. Rock Cornish game hens are perfect for my 
style of seasonal cooking, since each bird makes a plen­
tiful serving for one and tastes delicious with heaps of 
whatever bright, fresh vegetables we have on hand. 
A SPRING M E N U 
In this spring menu, I treat the game hens with a very 
light hand, cooking them simply with lots of fresh 
herbs, some early root vegetables, and serving them 
with a light lemony sauce that's made right in the pan 
as I roast. My roasting technique is a little different 
from the way you'd roast a chicken. I cook the birds 
covered for part of the time, in a very deep saute pan or 
a Dutch oven. I layer the bottom of the pan with the 
wing tips, vegetables, and seasonings, and then I 
arrange the birds (breast side down) on top. I pour 
over some chicken stock and lemon juice, cover the 
pan, and put them in the oven for about twenty min­
utes. I finish cooking them uncovered so they can tum 
golden and the liquid in the 
pan can reduce slightly. 
As with all poultry, you should use good handling 
techniques to minimize any risk of salmonella. I sug­
gest thawing frozen hens in the refrigerator overnight. 
You can also safely thaw them in a microwave set on 
low at about six minutes per pound, or in a cold water 
bath no longer than two hours, changing the water 
every thirty minutes. Never let a Cornish game hen 
thaw, or sit, at room temperature, and don't try to 
speed up thawing by running the bird under hot water. 
Fresh or thawed hens will keep up to three days in the 
refrigerator; cooked meat will keep up to two days. 
BONING IS EASY 
Removing the backbone of a Cornish hen is a trick 
well worth mastering. A boned hen lies flat, exposing 
more of the bird to the heat source and allowing the 
natural juices and any marinade to permeate the hen 
rather than running off. Boned birds also are easily di­
vided in half for serving. An under-the-skin stuffing 
plumps up a boned bird for an appealing presentation. 
To bone a Cornish hen (or any bird, really), begin 
by trimming the wings with a sharp knife or poultry 
shears. I do this whether I'm 
This dish is simple enough 
to cook for a spur of the mo­
ment dinner, but I think it's so 
pretty and flavorful that it feels 
special enough for a dinner 
party. I'd begin the meal with a 
salad; since the game hen is 
light, the salad can have richer 
components, like toasted goat 
cheese croutons. The game 
hen recipe itself contains all 
the side dishes you'll need, so 
all that's left is a dessert. I've 
chosen a moist poppy seed 
Tossed Greens with 
Baked Goat Cheese Croutons 
& Shallot Vinaigrette 
boning the game hen or using 
it whole, cutting the wings at 
the second joint (see bottom 
photo at right) . Add the trim­
mings to the roasting pan, or 
save them for stock; they're a 
great source of flavor. 
• 
Cornish Game Hens 
Roasted with Spring Vegetables 
Next, prop up the game hen 
so it's vertical, with its back 
toward you (see top photo on 
p. 33). With a sharp knife, cut 
through the skin and flesh 
along the entire length of one 
side of the spine. Flip the bird 
• 
Poppy Seed Cake with 
Lemon Curd 
cake that's great to bake ahead. I serve slices of the 
cake with sweet-tart lemon curd that I mellow a little 
by folding in whipped cream. 
GAME HEN BASICS 
Rock Cornish game hens are the result of cross­
breeding Cornish gamecocks and Plymouth Rock 
hens; don't confuse them with poussins, which are 
young chickens. Each plump bird is a generous single 
serving, making game hens ideal for households of 
one or two people. Weighing about a pound, Cornish 
game hens roast in an hour, and they cook even more 
quickly if split and grilled or broiled. 
Cornish game hens are sold fresh or frozen. Frozen 
hens are more common, but I prefer fresh hens. 
They're more tender, have a cleaner flavor, and tend 
to become crispier when roasted. If you can find 
them, fresh ones cost a bit more, but they're worth 
the extra expense. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
around and repeat on the other 
side of the spine. Remove the backbone. (This can 
also be added to the roasting pan or saved for stock.) 
Use the tip of the knife to remove the little wishbone 
at the neck end, and spread open the bird with the in­
side facing you. Find the whitish triangle of cartilage at 
the tip of the breastbone and nick it with the knife 
(see middle photo on p. 33). Now pick up the bird and 
bend it backward along the breastbone to crack it. 
Slide the tip of the knife or your finger under each side 
of the breastbone to loosen it, and then yank it out. 
Leave the ribs in place. 
THE WELL-DRESSED HEN 
Plump Cornish hens take well to almost any dressing 
or stuffing. You can use your favorite bread or corn­
bread stuffing to fill the cavity, or try making a won­
derful stuffing from odd pieces of homemade bread, 
leftover rice pilaf, or new potatoes. Toss the starch 
you choose with chopped mushrooms and a root 
Preparing Cornish 
game hens couldn't 
be easier. Scatter the 
vegetables and herbs 
in the bottom of a deep 
saute pan, arrange the 
seasoned hens (breast 
side down) on the 
vegetables, add a little 
stock and lemon juice 
to the pan, and slide it 
into the oven. 
To trim the wings, 
find the joint and 
slice right through. 
Extending the wing will 
help you see the right 
place to cut. Save the 
wing tips and add 
them to the roasting 
pan for more flavor. 
31

--- Page 32 ---
MAKING IT EASY 
No need to rush with 
this menu-lots can 
be prepared ahead, 
and the last-minute 
tasks are "low-stress. " 
Two days ahead: 
+ Soak the poppy 
seeds for the cake. 
One day ahead: 
+ Bake the cake and 
make the lemon curd 
base. 
In the afternoon: 
+ Wash the greens. 
+ Make the 
vinaigrette. 
+ Marinate the goat 
cheese. 
+ Prepare the 
vegetables. 
+ Trim and season the 
Com ish hens. 
As the evening 
begins: 
+ Roast the Cornish 
hens and make the 
sauce. 
+ Bake the goat 
cheese croutons and 
assemble the salad. 
+ Whip the cream 
and fold it into the 
lemon curd. 
32 
Warm goat cheese 
on croutons gives 
this spring salad 
special appeal. 
Make some extra 
shallot vinaigrette 
to use later. 
Poppy seeds look 
dramatic and taste 
delicious in this cake. 
A big spoonful of 
creamy lemon curd 
is the sharp-but­
sweet accent. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 33 ---
vegetable sauteed in butter or olive oil. You'll need a 
little less than a cup of stuffing for each bird. 
I find an "under-the-skin" stuffing more interesting 
than a stuffing in the cavity. The flavoring in the stuff­
ing really permeates the meat, and with this method 
you can stuff boned and split birds that you plan to 
grill (see boning instructions on p. 31). The stuffing 
can be as simple as butter and fresh herbs or more 
complex, like the cheese, herb, and prosciutto stuffing 
I suggest for a winter game-hen dish (see recipe p. 35). 
To prepare a game hen for an under-the-skin stuff­
ing, begin at the top of the breast, and gently lift and 
pull the skin away from the flesh of the bird. Be very 
careful and very patient; game hen skin is delicate. 
Once you've separated the skin from the meat, use 
your fingers to gently force the stuffing between the 
meat and skin, pushing it back and around the breast, 
and even down the thighs and legs, as you go. Try to 
keep the layer of stuffing as even as possible for a better 
shape and even cooking. Don't force too much under 
the skin, or fill the cavity with too much if you're using 
that method, since stuffing expands as it cooks. 
TOSSED GREENS WITH BAKED GOAT CHEESE 
CROUTONS & SHALLOT VINAIGRETTE 
This salad is simple but the flavors work beautifully together. 
Serves four. 
4 oz. soft goat cheese ̩
 cup good-quality olive oil 
1 clove garlic, crushed 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh mixed herbs (such as basil, tarragon, 
thyme, parsley) 
4 slices French bread, about y" in. thick 
About 6 cups mixed salad greens 
FOR THE SHALLOT VINAIGRETTE: 
2 medium shallots, sliced 
Y.t cup good-quality white-wine vinegar 
1 tsp. Dijon mustard 
% cup plus 1 Tbs. good-quality olive oil 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
Marinate the goat cheese in the oil, garlic, and herbs at 
least 1 hour, longer if you have time. 
At least 2 hours before serving, combine the shallots and 
vinegar in a medium bowl and let sit at room temperature 
for about 2 hours. Whisk in the mustard, and then whisk in 
the oil in a slow, steady stream. Season with salt and pepper. 
Just before serving, heat the oven to 450°. Brush some 
of the seasoned oil from the cheese onto both sides of the 
bread slices and toast for a few minutes until slightly crispy. 
Spread the goat cheese evenly on one side of the toasted 
croutons and "blast" them in the hot oven for 1 to 2 min., 
until the cheese is hot but not melted or gooey. 
Toss the greens with a few spoonfuls of the vinaigrette 
(store the rest covered in the refrigerator up to three days), 
divide among four plates, and garnish with a crouton. 
CORNISH GAME HENS ROASTED WITH 
SPRING VEGETABLES 
Use whatever vegetables you like, just make sure to add 
softer, quicker-cooking ones later. Exact amounts aren't 
important in this dish, but don't crowd the roasting pan. 
Use more than one pan if your ingredients are mounded 
too high. Serves four. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
4 Cornish hens (about 1 lb. each) 
4 Tbs. unsalted butter, softened 
Several generous sprigs of mixed fresh herbs (thyme, 
rosemary, parsley, marjoram, savory) 
8 garlic cloves, peeled 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
1 lb. young carrots, peeled if necessary 
1 lb. new potatoes, peeled if necessary and halved if large ̩
 cup homemade or low-salt canned chicken stock 
Y.t cup lemon juice 
1 lb. fresh asparagus, ends trimmed, peeled if necessary 
More butter for sauce (optional) 
Shreds of lemon zest and more fresh herbs for decoration 
Rinse each game hen, pat dry, and cut off and reserve the 
wings at the second joint. Gently loosen the skin from the 
breast meat and smear about 2 tsp. of the soft butter under 
the skin of each bird. Slide in a few sprigs of herbs. Put a few 
more sprigs, along with 2 garlic cloves, into each cavity. Rub 
the rest of the butter on the outside of each bird, and then 
season inside and out with the salt and pepper. If you like, 
tie the ends of the legs together for a neater presentation. 
Heat the oven to 400°F. In a deep saute pan or a Dutch 
oven, toss the reserved wing tips, carrots, potatoes, and any 
remaining herbs. Arrange the hens, breast side down, on top 
of the vegetables and bones. They can fit snugly, but they 
shouldn't be squeezed together. Sprinkle with salt and 
pepper, pour in the stock and lemon juice. Cover the pan and 
cook in the hot oven for about 20 min. Remove the lid, turn 
the birds so they're breast side up, baste them with a little pan 
juice and continue roasting (uncovered), basting a few more 
times, until they're golden brown and the juices run clear 
from their cavities or from their thighs when pricked with a 
knife. This should take about 45 to 55 min. more. About 
Prop up the bird so 
you can slice along 
the backbone (left). 
Cut along each side 
with a sharp knife, or 
use poultry shears. 
The backbone comes 
away easily, allowing 
you to open up the 
bird to remove the 
breastbone. The back­
bone can go in the 
roasting pan or the 
stockpot for flavor, too. 
To remove the breast­
bone, loosen the car­
tilage, grasp it firmly, 
and yank. Now your 
game hen is "flat, " 
ready for grilling or 
roasting quickly. 
There's a lot of room 
for stuffing under the 
skin. The author gently 
slides her fingers 
between the skin and 
meat to create a large 
pocket, perfect for a 
prosciutto and cheese 
stuffing, fresh herbs, or 
a savory bread stuffing. 
33

--- Page 34 ---
Game hen is right 
for summer when it's 
grilled and served 
on cool, crisp greens. 
A yogurt marinade 
and a tangy, garlicky 
Moroccan dressing 
make the dish 
delicious. 
34 
Make a warming autumn meal by roasting game hens with acorn squash 
and sage. Sprinkle on some toasted pumpkin seeds for a crunchy, nutty finish. 
10 min. before you think the birds will be done, arrange the 
asparagus over the top of the birds to cook it. If you're not 
sure about the timing, or if your pan is too full, simply steam 
the asparagus separately for about 5 min. in salted water. 
Remove the birds and vegetables and keep them warm. 
Strain the pan juices, skim off as much fat as possible, and 
taste. If they're a little thin, boil them for a few minutes to 
concentrate the flavor; season with salt and pepper. If the 
sauce tastes too lemony, whisk in 1 or 2 Tbs. cold butter. 
To serve, arrange one hen on each plate and arrange the 
vegetables around it. Pour over a few spoonfuls of sauce and 
decorate with shreds of lemon zest and some fresh herbs. 
POPPY SEED CAKE WITH LEMON CURD 
I use lots of poppy seeds in this cake for a striking look and 
delicious flavor. Yields one bundt cake and about 1 \.? cups 
creamy lemon curd. 
FOR THE CAKE: 
1 cup poppy seeds 
Õ cup milk 
12 Tbs. unsalted butter 
1 \.? cups sugar 
3 eggs 
1 tsp. vanilla extract 
2 cups unbleached all-purpose flour 
2 tsp. baking powder 
\.? tsp. salt 
1 Tbs. grated orange zest 
FOR THE LEMON CURD: 
Grated zest of 4 lemons 
\.? cup lemon juice 
2 eggs 
2 egg yolks 
1 cup sugar 
6 Tbs. unsalted butter 
\.? cup heavy cream, chilled 
Fresh berries and mint sprigs for decoration 
For the cake-Soak the poppy seeds in the milk ovemight. 
Heat the oven to 37SO and generously butter and flour 
a 9-in. (1 O-cup) bundt pan. With an electric mixer, cream 
the butter and sugar in a large bowl. Add the eggs one at 
a time, beating well after each addition. Add the vanilla 
and the milk with the poppy seeds. Sift together the flour, 
baking powder, salt, and orange zest; add this to the butter 
and sugar mixture, blending well. Pour the batter into the 
prepared pan and bake until the cake springs back when 
you press it lightly, 30 to 40 min. Cool on a rack about 
1 0 min., and then take the cake out of the pan and cool 
completely on the rack. 
For the lemon curd-In a stainless-steel bowl, whisk 
together the lemon zest, juice, eggs, egg yolks, and sugar. 
Put the bowl over a pot of simmering-not boiling-water 
to form a double boiler and cook, whisking constantly, 
until the mixture becomes thick, translucent, and a little 
"wobbly." Remove the pan from the heat and strain the 
mixture into a bowl. Whisk in the butter until completely 
incorporated. Chill thoroughly. 
Just before serving-Whip the cream until it forms 
soft peaks. Fold a little of the whipped cream into the 
lemon curd to lighten it, and then gently fold in the rest. 
To serve-Slice the cake and top each slice with a 
generous spoonful of lemon curd. Decorate with fresh 
berries and a mint sprig, if you like. 
Lucia Watson is a native of Minneapolis. She opened 
her restaurant ten years ago, and even though she's 
expanded twice, it's still difficult to get a reservation. 
Lucia was assisted on this article by Beth Dooley, a 
Minneapolis food writer who is Lucia's co-author of 
Savoring the Seasons of the Northern Heartland, 
Knopf Cooks American Series, 1 994. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 35 ---
Feature game hens at 
a special winter meal. 
Stuffed with Parmesan 
and prosciutto, a split 
bird makes an elegant 
main course. 
Cornish game hens are delicious any time of year 
Cornish game hens form 
easy partnerships with 
many ingredients, making 
them good candidates for a 
menu no matter what the 
season. Roast them whole 
with sage, acorn squash, 
and a sprinkling of toasted 
pumpkin seeds for a warm­
ing autumn meal. For win­
ter, dress up the birds by 
boning them and stuffing 
them under the skin with a 
thin slice of prosciutto and 
a savory ricotta and Parme­
san filling. Cornish hens 
are great for grilling, too, 
so build a summer menu 
around birds that are mari­
nated in spiced yogurt, 
grilled, and served on a bed 
of mixed greens with a 
tangy cilantro dressing. 
GRILLED GAME HEN SALAD 
FOR SUMMER 
Serves four. 
2 Cornish hens (about l ib. each) 
About 6 cups mixed salad greens 
FOR THE MARINADE: 
1 cup plain yogurt 
1 l-2 tsp. ground cumin 
Grated zest and juice of l-2 lemon 
1 l-2 tsp. chopped cilantro 
1 l-2 tsp. chopped fresh parsley 
Y., tsp. cayenne 
l-2 tsp. paprika 
Salt to taste 
Rinse the hens and pat them dry. 
Bone and flatten them (see in­
structions on p. 31 ). Mix together 
the marinade ingredients and rub 
all over the hens, including under 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
the skin. Refrigerate the hens in 
the marinade, covered, overnight. 
Prepare a charcoal or gas grill 
and heat to medium. Remove the 
hens from the marinade and let 
some of the excess drip off. Place 
each hen, skin side down, on the 
grill and cook for 1 to 2 min.; re­
peat on the other side. Cover the 
grill and cook the hens about 
15 min. on each side. Grill tem­
peratures vary, so check for done­
ness carefully. The hens are done 
when the thigh juices run clear 
when pricked with a fork. 
Let the hens rest for a few 
minutes until they're cool enough 
to handle. Cut into quarters, or 
with a paring knife and your 
fingers, remove all the meat. 
You can serve the salad while the 
meat is still warm, or you can 
chill it first. 
To serve, make a mound of 
greens on each plate, arrange the 
grilled meat on top and drizzle 
with your favorite vinaigrette or 
with charmoula (see recipe below). 
CHARMOULA 
Yields about 1 Y., cups. 
l-2 cup olive oil 
Y., cup fresh lemon juice 
Y., cup chopped parsley 
Y., cup chopped cilantro 
2 cloves garlic, minced fine 
1 l-2 tsp. paprika 
1 tsp. ground cumin 
Y., tsp. cayenne 
Salt and freshly ground black 
pepper to taste 
Whisk all ingredients together in 
a mixing bowl. Taste and adjust 
seasoning. Any leftover charmoula 
can be stored in the refrigerator 
for up to three days. 
GAME HENS WITH SQUASH 
& SAGE FOR AUTUMN 
Serves four. 
4 Cornish hens (about 1 lb. each) 
1 tsp. dried sage 
4 Tbs. unsalted butter, softened 
Salt and freshly ground black 
pepper to taste 
8 cloves garlic, peeled 
12 sprigs fresh sage (or 1 Tbs. dried) 
1 Tbs. oil 
2 cups coarsely chopped onion 
4 cups peeled, cubed acorn squash 
l-2 cup dry white wine 
l-2 cup homemade or low-salt 
canned chicken stock 
l-2 cup toasted pumpkin seeds or 
walnut pieces 
Heat the oven to 400°F. Remove 
any fat from the hen cavities; rinse 
and pat them dry. Gently loosen 
the skin from the breast meat and 
sprinkle about 1f4 tsp. dried sage 
over the breasts. Rub each hen 
with the butter, season generously 
with salt and pepper, and put 
2 cloves of garlic and 1 sage sprig 
(or a pinch of dried) in each cavity. 
Truss the legs if you like. 
Heat the oil in a roasting pan. 
Cook the onion over medium heat 
until lightly browned, about 8 min. 
Off the heat, arrange the squash in 
the pan. Scatter the remaining 
fresh sage over the vegetables. Add 
the wine and stock. Arrange the 
hens, breast side down, on the 
vegetables and roast. (See roasting 
directions on p. 33.) 
When done, remove the hens 
and vegetables; keep warm. Strain 
the pan juices and taste. If thin, boil 
for a few minutes to concentrate. If 
you like, swirl in 1 Tbs. butter. Ad­
just the seasoning. Serve the hens 
on top of the onions and squash, 
drizzled with sauce, and garnished 
with pumpkin seeds or walnuts. 
PARMESAN-PROSCIUTTO 
GAME HENS FOR WINTER 
Serves four. 
2 Cornish hens (about 1 lb. each) 
4 large, thin slices prosciutto or 
good-quality country ham, 
cut in half 
Oil or butter for cooking 
Salt and freshly ground black 
pepper to taste 
FOR THE CHEESE FILLING: 
1 small onion, diced fine and 
sauteed in a little oil 
2 Tbs. chopped parsley 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh basil leaves 
2 Tbs. grated Parmesan cheese 
Y., cup fresh breadcrumbs 
1 egg yolk 
1 egg 
% cup ricotta cheese 
Salt and freshly ground black 
pepper to taste 
Mix all the cheese filling ingredi­
ents together until well blended. 
Rinse the hens and pat them 
dry. Remove the backbones and 
flatten them, and then carefully 
work a half slice of prosciutto 
under the skin of each side of each 
bird (see photos on p. 33). 
With a spoon or a pastry bag, 
spread some cheese filling on 
top of the ham, working it down 
evenly toward the thigh. Press the 
edge of the skin to close. 
Heat the oven to 400°. Rub 
a little butter or oil on the top of 
each bird, season with salt and 
pepper, and arrange on a shallow 
baking sheet. Roast until the 
juices from the thigh run clear, 
about 45 min. Let rest a few min­
utes, and then cut each hen in 
half through the breast. 
Serve half a hen per person 
with a wintery accompaniment, 
such as spatzle or pureed winter 
squash . • 
35

--- Page 36 ---
FINE COOKING

--- Page 37 ---
APRIL/MAY 1995

37

--- Page 38 ---
FINE COOKING

--- Page 39 ---
APRIL/MAY 1995

39

--- Page 40 ---
May: Time to 
Start a Rumpot 
The summer's best berries, plus rum and 
sugar, make a luscious wintertime dessert 
BY MARLENE PARRI S H 
40 
Ihad never heard of rum­
pot until a German friend of 
mine served it many years ago. She spooned a 
drift of softly whipped cream into a stemmed 
glass and topped it with a ladleful of dark, 
sweet preserved summer berries in a heady 
syrup. Accompanied by dark-roast coffee, it 
was irresistible. 
My version of rumpot consists of whole 
berries and cherries preserved in a rum 
and sugar syrup. The sugar and alcohol pre­
serve the berries while adding a flavor of 
their own. There's no set recipe, but the tech-
nique must be consistent. Select only perfect 
berries as they come into season. Weigh them, put 
them in a crock or a jar, add an equal portion of 
sugar, douse with rum, cover the container, and set 
it in a cool, dark place to work its magic. When you 
get the next lot of berries, repeat the process, add­
ing everything to the same crock. 
EASY AND SWEET 
For the container, you'll need a two-
to four-quart crock, such as a 
bean pot or a heavy, wide­
mouth jar. If you want to be 
absolutely authentic, check 
out flea markets or country 
stores for a ceramic German 
crock labeled rumtopf. Glass 
is less traditional, but it 
works just fine. Since the 
pot must be kept covered, it's 
best to use a container with a 
tight-fitting lid, but you can always 
cover the pot with foil or plastic wrap. 
Since fruit and sugar are added in equal 
weights, you'll also need a scale. 
Anything from a handful to a whole basket of 
berries can be added at any time. There are no rules 
for amounts, but a good proportion might be a quart 
of strawberries, a quart of raspberries, two cups of 
cherries, a cup of blueberries, and two cups of black­
berries. The fruit will shrink somewhat during 
steeping as the sugar solution pulls water from the 
fruit by osmosis. 
Apples, peaches, plums, citrus fruits, and pine­
apple are often added to rumpots. They're deli­
cious, but because they must be peeled and 
chopped, they tend to change the character of the 
mixture as they steep. And because they let off so 
much of their juice, they also cloud the 
syrup. Whether you use light or dark 
rum is a personal preference. I've 
used all light, all dark, and a 
mixture of both. 
HOW TO BEG I N 
Start your rumpot as soon 
as the summer fruit comes 
into market, beginning with 
the first strawberries of the season. 
Choose unblemished berries with an 
even red color and a heady perfume. 
Handle the berries gently-bruised fruit 
will spoil the clarity of the syrup as it steeps 
and spoil the rumpot. Give your berries a light 
rinse and then let them dry. Remove the hulls and 
weigh the strawberries before putting the fruit in 
the pot. Scatter an equal weight of sugar over the 
fruit and pour on enough rum to cover the sugar. 
Don't shake or stir. 
There i s no exact m e a s u r e m e nt for t h e 
amount o f r u m ; add just enough to cover the 
fruit. To keep the fruit completely submerged, 
choose a plate just a little smaller than the cir­
cumference of the container and set it on top of 
the berries. You want to be sure that the fruit is 
completely immersed in the rum to prevent it from 
being exposed to air and spoiling. Put a tight­
fitting lid on the pot if you have one; otherwise, 
cover it with aluminum foil or plastic wrap. If the 
pot isn't tightly covered, the rum will evaporate. 
(If that happens, simply add more rum.) A fruit 
cellar is the traditional spot for storing a rumpot. 
Keep yours in any cool, dark place. 
Add cherries next when they come into season 
in early July. Red Bing cherries and white Rainiers 
are both good candidates; save sour cherries for 
pies. Rinse and dry the fruit, remove the stems, and 
leave the pits intact. Check the pot for any un­
dissolved sugar before adding more fruit. Use a 
chopstick or a rubber spatula to soften any lumps 
you may see, but be gentle---overstirring can dam­
age the fruit and make the syrup cloudy. Add the 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 41 ---
cherries, an equal 
weight of sugar, 
cover with rum, re-
place the plate to 
submerge the fruit, 
reseal the pot, and 
return it to a cool, 
dark place. 
Add black and red 
raspberries as they come 
into season. Be sure the rasp­
berries are plump and juicy; avoid 
any that are dry, seedy, or show signs 
of mold. By now the sugar and rum should 
have married into a syrup. If, when you add a new 
batch of berries and sugar, they're covered with 
syrup and well below the surface, don't bother 
adding more rum. The point is to be sure that the 
fruit is submerged, not drowned. Too much rum 
makes the syrup weak. 
Next add blueberries, but not too many, because 
they can get stiff and rubbery as they steep. Since 
blueberries are so small and easy to pick over, it's 
tempting to add a whole basket. Resist the urge or 
you'll end up with an unbalanced ratio of fruit. 
Blackberries ripen in August and are usually 
my last addition to the rumpot. Other parts of the 
country have an abundance of native berries that 
are good rumpot candidates, too. Use whatever 
is plentiful and luscious in your area. Follow the 
same procedure with the sugar and 
rum, stirring gently to distrib­
ute any undissolved sugar 
before adding the fruit. 
By summer's end you 
will have the bounty of 
h a lf a farm field on the 
shelf. Think about serving the 
rumpot in late fall, long after 
local fresh fruit has become a 
fond memory. At our house, 
we open the crock after 
Thanksgiving dinner, al­
though you could begin 
sampling as early as the end 
of October. 
A rumpot is fruity and delicious, but remember 
that the syrup is still an alcoholic beverage. Its alco­
hol content is closer to that of a liqueur than of 
rum, however, because the sugar draws the juice 
out of the berries and dilutes the rum. 
Marlene Parrish, a former food editor and restaurant 
reviewer for Pittsburgh Magazine, is now a freelance 
food and travel writer. A lifelong foodie, she has owned 
and operated a cooking school, worked as a food stylist, 
and cowritten five cookbooks. • 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Rumpot for dessert 
Rumpot has an affinity for plain­
Jane desserts, and its texture is 
greatly enhanced by the silkiness 
of whipped toppings. Here are 
some ways to serve it: 
+ Top a slice of pound cake or 
angel food cake with a spoonful 
or two of rumpot and garnish 
with whipped cream. 
+ Sneak some into the center of 
a filled cream puff. 
+ Spoon a fluff of softly whipped 
cream into a small wine glass. 
Top with a spoonful or two of 
rumpot. 
+ Add elegance to a simple dish 
of ice cream with a ladleful of 
rumpot. Try it with vanilla, cin­
namon, or berry ice cream. 
+ Spoon rumpot over any 
cheesecake, mousse, or 
soft pudding that needs 
a lift. 
Is there too much liquid in your 
rumpot? Don't worry about it. 
Trying to end up with equal 
amounts of berries and syrup is 
like trying to saw a four-legged 
table: it never comes out just 
right. Any leftover syrup can be 
strained, bottled, and kept in 
the refrigerator and used in 
any of the ways suggested 
above. Or, after a big din­
ner, forgo dessert and pour 
yourself a liqueur glass of

--- Page 42 ---
Roasting Rack of Lamb 
Cooked whole, the rack is more than the sum of its chops 
BY MOLLY STEVENS 
Ôere is something undeniably elegant and in-
1 Óulgent about rack oflamb. With its rich fla­
vor, tender texture, and visual appeal, this majestic 
cut is often reserved for special occasions or intimate 
dinners for two. While most lamb is eaten in restau­
rants, I've found that preparing rack of lamb at 
home is surprisingly easy and always impressive. 
Although the rack is simply eight lamb chops left as 
one roast, it is altogether more splendid than serving 
individual chops. Roasted whole, the meat remains 
juicier and the presentation is more dramatic, while 
the preparation itself very straightforward. 
BUYING A RACK OF LAM B 
Lamb was once considered a seasonal specialty, but 
this is no longer true. Modern farming now ensures 
high-quality lamb year-round. The lamb available 
in markets today comes from animals ranging in 
age from four to nine months. Anything older is 
classified as mutton and is a different product al­
together. Meat from the smallest livestock, known 
as "baby" lamb (also called "hothouse" lamb) , is 
still easiest to locate in the spring when lamb sales 
are the highest. Most butchers don't regularly offer 
racks (only chops), but they will gladly order one 
for you if you call ahead. 
What's included in the rack? The "rack" refers 
to the section of meat extending from the shoulder 
to the loin. The rack usually consists of eight rib 
chops, but some butchers will offer seven or nine 
ribs to a rack. Expect a trimmed rack, including 
bone, to weigh between one and a quarter and one 
and a half pounds. Each chop offers around two 
ounces of meat. 
While restaurants generally feel obliged to indulge 
diners with four chops per person, two will satisfy 
modest appetites and three are usually enough for 
more enthusiastic eaters. So a single rack oflamb will 
nicely serve two or three people, at two to four chops 
per person. A well-trimmed rack delivers enormous 
flavor, even when served in moderate amounts. 
When you order a rack, ask to have the chine 
bones (the backbone) removed. Many retailers 
prefer to leave these attached because they help 
42 
hold the chops securely together, but this also adds 
quite a bit of weight, which shows up at the cash 
register. If you roast your lamb with the backbone 
attached, you'll have difficulty carving the rack 
into individual servings. Some butchers leave the 
backbone attached but score it between the ribs 
with a saw. These cuts make carving easier. The 
problem with this method is finding the exact spot 
where the butcher made the cuts. If you forget to 
ask, you can remove the chine bones yourself with 
a heavy cleaver. 
If you're planning a dinner for two and would like 
to order less than the standard eight-rib rack, ask 
the butcher to cut your roast from the saddle end 
(the end closest to the loin) . The ribs at this end 
have a larger "eye"-the center nugget-of lean 
meat and a nicer shape. The ribs closest to the 
shoulder end tend to be a bit smaller. My husband 
and I like to treat ourselves by roasting a partial rack 
Hold the rack upright 
to get it nicely 
browned. Use the 
tongs to make sure all 
sides of the lamb come 
in contact with the hot 
pan, so the meat has a 
chance to caramelize. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 43 ---
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Pink, juicy meat and a crispy coating. Lamb is best served 
medium rare, as the flavor can become quite strong and the 
texture tough when cooked beyond medium. 
"Frenching" the ribs for dramatic curves. The author pulls and 
scrapes away all the meat, fat, and sinew to make the rib bones 
neat and sleek. 
Removing the deckle is easy if you follow the natural seams in 
the meat. Pull on the fat layer with one hand while you use a 
knife to cut with the other. 
oflamb. We order a neat little five-rib rack and open 
a bottle of fine red wine. 
"FRENCHI NG" FOR A CLEAN lOOK 
Even if you have a helpful butcher, you'll probably 
still have to do some trimming when you bring the 
lamb home from the market. To maximize the rack's 
visual appeal and reduce unwanted fat, you'll want to 
trim the rack so that the rib bones are exposed and 
almost all visible fat has been removed. This is called 
"frenching" the rack. 
Lay the rack on your cutting board so that the ribs 
are arching away from the board. Holding a sharp bon­
ing knife perpendicular to the bones, cut through the 
fat just below the eye, being careful not to actually cut 
into the eye. You can now easily remove the bulk of the 
fat covering the bones by sliding the blade of your knife 
along the ribs-starting at the cut you've just made­
to their ends. Next, with the point of your boning 
knife, cut around each rib bone and remove the fat 
between them. The ribs should now be free of most 
fat, but to give the roasted rack a clean appearance, 
scrape the rib ends with your knife to remove the bits 
of fat and tendon that remain. You can also simply pull 
them off with your hands (see center photo at left) . 
The meaty part of the rack consists of two main 
layers: the eye and the "deckle," a thin layer of meat 
sandwiched between two layers of fat. Most butchers 
leave the deckle as part of the rack, but I prefer to re­
move it, creating a more elegant roast. Many people 
only trim the deckle away from the chops at the saddle 
end, where the eye meat is larger. To remove the 
deckle, simply cut along the natural seam that sepa­
rates it from the eye. Start at the rib end and move 
your knife down the face of the rack between the fat and 
the meat (see bottom photo at left). The truck layer 
should come away easily. Leave a thin covering of fat on 
the meatj this will help keep it moist during cooking. 
43

--- Page 44 ---
Mustard helps the crumb 
coating stick. Paint a thin 
layer on the seared rack. 
Roll the rack in herbs and 
crumbs and then roast it in 
a hot oven. 
Let the rack rest before 
carving for juicier, more 
tender chops. 
44 
ROASTING A RACK OF LAM B 
The real charm of the rack oflamb is that it's so easy 
to prepare. The meat itself is so superb that the less 
fussing, the better. Simple, unadorned roasting is 
my favorite way to prepare the rack, but I also enjoy 
a mild mustard coating or a more complex herb­
crusted rack (see recipes below right) . 
The roasting method has two steps-First sear 
the lamb and then finish cooking it in a hot oven. 
While heating the oven to 475°F, put a heavy-based, 
dry skillet over high heat. Season the lamb with salt 
and pepper. Using tongs or a meat fork, put the 
lamb, meat side down, in the skillet. With your 
tongs, hold the lamb against the skillet for a minute 
to give it a nice brown crust. Turn the meat to sear it 
on all sides for a total of four minutes. 
After all sides of the meat have been seared, 
transfer the rack to an oval gratin dish (a standard 
roasting pan is too large for a single rack). Cover 
the rib bones with strips of foil so they don't burn 
and then put the dish on the center rack of the hot 
oven. The most accurate method for judging done­
ness is by temperature (see the sidebar below) , but 
How do you know 
when it's done? 
Even the most experienced cooks have 
trouble judging the done ness of a rack of 
lamb by feel, so I always rely on my meat 
thermometer. Remove the meat from the 
oven when it has reached an internal tem­
perature that is 5° to 10° lower than your 
desired doneness to allow for carryover 
cooking, which occurs during the five­
minute rest before carving. This rest allows 
the juices to redistribute evenly and results 
in a moister and more tender roast. So for 
medium-rare meat, you should remove the 
roast from the oven when it has reached an 
internal temperature of l200E I don't rec­
ommend cooking lamb beyond medium 
because it begins to develop a strong, gamey 
flavor, and all its tenderness disappears. 
Final temperature after a five-minute rest: 
• rare-1 15° to 125° 
• medium rare-125° to 135° 
• medium-140° to 145° 
generally the rack should reach medium rare in 
about 20 to 25 minutes. 
CARVING AT THE TABLE 
With the chine bones removed, carving the roasted 
rack is easy and quick. Use a carving knife to cut be­
tween the rib bones. Once carved, the chops will 
cool quickly, so you should carve at the table. Be­
sides, you'll want to show off the beautiful rack by 
presenting it in its entirety. 
Once you've cut the rack into chops, it's easy to 
make them look great on the plate. One way of doing 
this is to fan two or three chops on one side of the 
plate with the rib ends toward the center. You might 
even want to leave two or three chops together and 
serve them standing upright as a mini rack. Be sure to 
provide your guests with good steak knives. 
HERB CRUST FOR LAMB 
Lamb goes wonderfully with anything redolent of rosemary, 
thyme, savory, garliC, and olive oil. Some of my favorite 
accompaniments are garlic-roasted potatoes, ratatouille, 
and a gratin of zucchini. For this recipe, use only fresh 
breadcrumbs, which you can make in a food processor or 
with a cheese grater. 
1 large clove garlic, chopped fine 
2 Tbs. chopped fresh parsley 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh thyme (or y" tsp. dried thyme) 
Õ cup fresh breadcrumbs 
2 Tbs. olive oil 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
1 Tbs. Dijon mustard 
Heat the oven to 47SOF. In a shallow bowl, combine the 
garlic, parsley, thyme, and breadcrumbs. Moisten with 
enough olive oil to make the mixture hold together. Season 
the lamb with salt and pepper and sear it in a hot skillet. 
Remove the meat from the skillet and use a pastry brush to 
paint the meat side of the rack with the mustard. Roll the 
meat in the herb mixture to coat it. Roast the rack in the 
hot oven until it reaches the desired intemal temperature 
(see sidebar at left). If you want a crispier crust, finish cook­
ing the rack under the broiler for 2 min. 
MUSTARD COATING FOR LAMB 
This is a simple yet delicious coating. Use a good-quality 
Dijon mustard, as its flavor will permeate the finished dish. 
2 Tbs. Dijon mustard 
2 tsp. chopped fresh rosemary 
2 Tbs. olive oil 
1 Tbs. lemon juice 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
Heat the oven to 475°. Stir together the ingredients and sear 
the lamb; then brush the coating on the meat. Roast the 
lamb according to the method described above left. 
Molly Stevens earned a grand diplOme from La Varenne 
cooking school in Paris, where she also worked at 
several Michelin-starred restaurants. She returned to 
the United States to become assistant director of the 
French Culinary Institute in New York City. Currently, 
she is a chef/ instructor at the New England Culinary 
Institute in Essex, Vermont. • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 45 ---
Ω 
Plump, freshly 
"" Ϛ gathered morels 
c1: 
(like these at right) 
.Ϝ 
g 
start coming to 
ه 
market in March 
E ϛ 
and disappear again 
5 
by early summer. 
" 
ɷ 
Luckily, dried morels 
਴ 
are available year-
1 
round. 
ਵ 1! • c. g 
J 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Morels 
More than 
Just Mushrooms 
Delicacies from the forest floor 
herald the arrival of spring 
S ometime in sluggish, slushy March, just when 
I've despaired of ever going barefoot again, 
a "morel fax" inches its way into Aux Delices 
des Bois, my mushroom shop. A Michigan sight­
ing! Cabin-fevered, I start planning the first meal: 
tiny, thumbnail-sized morels glossed with sweet 
cream butter; earthy slices of morel folded into a 
creamy risotto; giant morels stuffed with cheese 
and herbs. 
This spongy, cone-shaped fungus gives gourmets 
a thrill and commands respect from foragers. While 
BY AMY FARG ES 
mushroom gatherers may divulge the site of a chan­
terelle hotspot, the secret location of a morel patch 
is passed on only through bloodlines. 
A SHORT G ROWI NG SEASON 
A morel is a hollow, ace-of-spades-shaped mush­
room, full oflittle pits and ridges. At its opening is a 
narrow, tube-like stem. The rains of early spring 
trigger the morel season, and by mid-May the 
mushrooms are in full flush. Sadly, they're usually 
too wormy to harvest after late June. But in a good 
year, at the weather's whim, the morel season can 
stretch a month or so in each direction. 
Morels thrive on misfortune and are regulars 
at burn sites and cemeteries-they love freshly 
turned earth. Morels are so sure to crop up in the 
ashes of a forest fire that the Oregon State Depart­
ment of Agriculture auctions off the picking rights 
to these sites. This macabre mushroom also loves 
to pop up under diseased elms and in abandoned 
apple orchards. 
But in no way does this mean that morels are 
easy to find. Elusive as the jackalope, the morel 
cleverly disguises itself in shades of brown, gray, 
and beige to blend in with its environment. I've 
never actually found a morel in the wild, but my 
45

--- Page 46 ---
ALWAYS COOK 
YOUR MORELS 
Besides having a 
high-protein, low-fat 
profile, morels also 
contain very small 
traces of toxins. 
Fortunately, these 
trace toxins are 
neutralized by heat. 
To be safe, cook 
morels for a good 
fifteen minutes. It's 
also a good idea to 
avoid a steady diet of 
morels, to watch red 
wine intake during 
morel binges, and to 
never even taste a 
raw morel. 
Mycologists 
strongly advise 
against eating any 
wild mushroom 
you can't positively 
identify. Unless you 
are an experienced 
mushroom hunter, 
it's best to buy your 
morels from rep­
utable suppliers 
(see sources at right). 
Bring dried morels 
back to life. With a 
good soak in warm 
water; dried morels 
regain their springy 
texture. One ounce of 
dried morels will weigh 
four to six ounces after 
reconstituting, drain­
ing, and pressing. 
46 
partner in Aux Delices des Bois did find one once 
in a gravelly driveway. 
Where do they come from? The Pacific North­
west may well be the world's morel basket; a rollick­
ing $2.24 million worth of morels were shipped out 
of Oregon alone in 1993. This prime morel region 
extends east to Idaho, south to California, and as far 
north as Alaska, where pickers enter uncharted ter­
ritory by horseback and by parachute. Others fill 
their saddlebags in Michigan, Maryland, and Mis­
souri. Mexico has even offered morels in December, 
when the rest of us can only dream of spring. 
While the morel has long been prized in Europe, 
environmental neglect has led to the demise of 
fresh morels there. Dried morels sold under French 
labels are usually harvested in the United States, 
China, or Turkey. 
DELICIOUS FRESH OR DRIED 
To select fresh morels, look for dry, unbroken speci­
mens. Gray streaks in the pits usually mean mold is 
forming. The aroma should be of dead leaves and 
freshly turned soil. Any mushroom that smells dank 
or musty is past its prime. Sometimes fat white 
worms crawl out from morels, rubbing their eyes to 
see who disturbed their munching. Luckily, if you 
don't manage to pick them all out, the extra protein 
never did anybody any harm. 
Morels make great houseguests if you treat them 
right. I stow them in an uncovered basket on the 
middle shelf in my refrigerator so that air circulates 
around them. They can keep this way for about a 
week, although fresher is better. 
When morels aren't in season, it's still possible to 
enjoy them. While they don't freeze well raw, morels 
are great when sauteed first and then frozen. But the 
best way to enjoy morels when they're out of season 
is to buy dried morels. When dried, the morel's 
nutty, loamy flavor becomes even more intense. 
In my opinion, morels reconstitute better than 
any other dried mushroom. They regain their firm 
texture without becoming chewy. Due to the water­
weight loss, dried morels are pricey, at $100 or more 
per pound. But take heart-a few morels will go a 
long way. One ounce of dried morels will swell to 
about four ounces after being reconstituted. 
You can dry morels yourself when the fresh crop is 
plentiful. I string up whole fresh morels-preferably 
the small ones--on fishing line. My apartment ends 
up looking like a laundry, with lines strung from win­
dow to bookshelf and back again. Some people strew 
them on window screens laid horizontally across two 
chairs. They'll also dry in the oven, with the temper­
ature at the lowest setting. Drying can take a few 
days, depending upon the humidity. If they snap 
when you try to fold them, they're done. Store your 
dried morels in a glass jar, away from any moisture. 
Reconstituting dried morels. Morels will re­
constitute in about 45 minutes. Simply cover them 
in hot water (add a dash of cognac if you like) and 
give them a squeeze every few minutes to see how 
they're doing. Drain, press out the excess liquid, and 
you're all set. They'll keep another day in the refrig­
erator once they've been brought back to life. The 
reconstituting liquid, whether hot water or a higher­
octane water-and-cognac combo, gives you mush­
room stock. Reduced and strained, you get a con­
centrated mushroom jus. 
GENUS MORCHELLA 
As the season progresses, different species of morels 
crop up. These four Morchella species are edible, but 
watch out for the "false morel" (see below) . 
Morchella angusticeps is small and firm, with as­
tonishing black ridges and neat rows of pits. This 
variety is so small that it's best cooked whole. 
Morchella esculenta has gray-brown ridges and 
its pits are a bit deeper. Plump, curvaceous esculenta 
yields nice round slices that do well for interesting 
plate presentations. 
Morchella deliciosa earns its second name. Also 
called the white morel, deliciosa is the last morel to 
appear. It has creamy white ridges and matching pits. 
Morchella crassipes has flimsier walls with honey­
colored ridges and buff-hued pits. It has a bumpy 
interior surface. 
WATCH OUT FOR THE FALSE MOREL 
The black sheep of the morel family is the gyromitre, 
which looks like a small brain that suffered a melt­
down. Instead of growing upright, it spreads its 
wrinkled mass outward, with bulging folds and lobes. 
It isn't considered edible by mycologists and chefs 
alike, and eating the gyromitre is playing gastronomic 
Russian roulette. This fungus actually produces a 
chemical used in rocket propellant. I'd stay away. 
Amy Farges owns Aux Delices des Bois, a New York 
City mushroom shop, with her husband, Thierry. She 
is training their 1 6-month-old son}ulien in the finer 
points of morel spotting. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 47 ---
SOURCES FOR 
MORELS 
Morels are sold in 
gourmet produce 
markets, some super­
markets, and by mail­
order suppliers. 
Aux Delices des 
Bois, 4 Leonard St., 
New York, NY 1 001 3; 
800/666-1 232 or 
21 2/334-1230. 
Dried morels; fresh 
when in season. 
East Coast Exotics, 
PO Box 468, Tough­
kenamon, PA 1 9374; 
61 0/268-0771 . 
Dried morels; fresh 
when in season. 
Checks and money 
orders only. 
Polarica, PO Box 
880204, San Fran­
cisco, CA 941 88; 
800/GAME-USA or 
41 5/647-1 300. 
Dried morels; fresh 
when in season. 
Summerfield Farm, 
1 0044 James Monroe 
Hwy., Culpeper, VA 
22701 ; 703/547-
9600. Fresh morels 
when in season. 
Vanilla, Saffron 
Imports, 949 
Valencia St., San 
Francisco, CA 941 1 0; 
41 5/648-8990. Dried 
morels. Checks and 
money orders only. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Morels' tiny pits and folds are perfect receptacles for creamy sauces, like in this stew served with cornmeal pudding (recipe on p. 48). 
47

--- Page 48 ---
48 
Two dishes that celebrate morels 
Every spring, I look forward to 
cooking with morels, and I've 
found that certain ingredients 
have a natural affinity to these 
springtime mushrooms. Morels 
crave rich dairy products, in­
cluding fresh cream, mascar­
pone, and cultured items such 
as creme fraiche and sour cream. 
Morels are sensational with 
feathered game, such as grouse, 
pheasant, and partridge. I also 
enjoy morels immensely with 
firm-textured fish and shellfish, 
such as shad, snapper, monk­
fish, sea scallops, lobster, 
mussels, and Louisiana cray­
fish. In fact, I love morels with 
just about anything. 
Fresh morels lend them­
selves to sauteing but are partic­
ularly wonderful simmered in 
soups and sauces. Sauteing over 
a relatively high heat tends to 
keep the mushroom's flavor 
locked in, while slow, moist 
cooking will diffuse the morel's 
flavor and aroma throughout 
the dish. Large morels are best 
split or quartered. 
Many sources recommend 
thoroughly cooking all wild 
mushrooms-to neutralize 
allergens and toxins that might 
cause reactions in some people. 
But there's still lots of room 
for creativity while heeding 
this caution. 
Cleaning morels is a neces­
sity, but because morels have 
such an irregular surface, a tra­
ditional mushroom brush is use­
less. I find that the best method 
is a gentle, cool-water rinse 
under the spray-hose of my 
kitchen sink just before cook­
ing. Being hollow, morels will fill 
up with water during cleaning, 
and they should be drained with 
a gentle squeeze before cooking. 
There always seem to be a few 
stubborn spruce needles cling­
ing to the mushroom even after 
spray-cleaning; these must be 
removed by agile fingers or a 
pair of tweezers. 
The morel's woodsy-smoky­
earthy flavor begs for a wine 
with a similar sense of terroir, or 
the earth it comes from. One of 
my favorite accompaniments for 
morels is a deep, mature red 
Burgundy or a Pinot Noir from 
the Pacific Northwest. Dishes 
like this morel and mussel stew 
are nicely contrasted by a crisp 
Alsatian Riesling or a similar­
style wine from California. 
CREAMY MOREL STEW WITH 
HASTY PUDDING 
Hasty pudding is the AnglO-American 
analog of polenta. Serves six as an 
appetizer. 
FOR THE HASTY PUDDING: 
1 Tbs. unsalted butter 
2 Tbs. cleaned, diced leek, white part 
only 
2 cups water 
Y.! cup stone-ground yellow cornmeal 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
1 egg white, lightly beaten 
Butter for the ramekins or molds 
FOR THE MORELS: 
8 oz. fresh morels (or 8 oz. reconsti­
tuted dried morels, weighed after 
soaking and draining) 
1 Tbs. unsalted butter 
2 Tbs. minced shallots 
1 cup dry Madeira 
Few drops freshly squeezed lemon juice 
1 cup creme fraiche 
1 Õ cups chicken stock 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
12 green peppercorns, lightly crushed 
4 Tbs. chopped chervil leaves, more for 
decoration 
2 Tbs. snipped fresh chives, more for 
decoration 
For the pudding-Heat the oven 
to 375°F. 
Melt the butter in saucepan. 
Gently saute the leeks in the butter for 
2 min. to soften. Add the water and 
bring to a boil. Slowly stir in the com­
meal. Reduce the heat and simmer 
2 min., or until thickened. Season 
with salt and pepper to taste. Cool 
slightly and stir in the egg white. 
Divide the mixture among six 
4-oz. buttered ovenproof ramekins or 
molds. Put the ramekins in a shallow 
baking pan and pour enough boiling 
water in the pan to come halfway up 
the sides of the molds. Bake about 
25 min., until set but tender. (A knife 
BY SAM HAYWARD 
inserted into the middle will come out 
almost clean.) Set the molds aside 
and keep warm. 
For the morels-Cut large morels 
into smaller pieces. Melt the butter 
in a saute pan over moderate heat. 
When the foam subsides, add the 
morels and saute until soft but not 
browned, about 3 min. Add the shal­
lots and cook for another minute. 
Add the Madeira and lemon juice. 
Cook over high heat until liquid is 
reduced by half. Add the chicken 
stock and again reduce by half. Add 
the creme frafche and reduce over 
high heat until the sauce coats the 
back of a spoon. Season with salt, 
pepper, and green peppercorns. Stir 
in the chervil and chives. Taste and 
correct seasoning. Unmold the hasty 
puddings and nap with the morel 
stew. Decorate with more chives 
and chervil. 
MORELS & MUSSELS WITH 
SAFFRON CREAM 
I prefer to use farm-raised mussels 
rather than wild ones in this soup, as 
they give the broth a cleaner taste 
and they naturally pick up less sand. 
Serves six as an appetizer. 
3 lb. mussels in their shells 
2 Tbs. olive oil 
1 medium carrot, diced 
2 ribs celery, diced 
2 medium leeks, white and green parts 
separated, cleaned, and diced 
3 cloves garlic 
12 black peppercorns, crushed 
4 cups hard cider (or 3 cups dry white 
wine plus 1 cup apple juice) 
A bouquet of fresh herbs: sprigs of 
thyme, bay leaf, rosemary, savory, 
and tarragon 
1 lb. fresh morels (or 1 lb. reconstituted 
dried morels, weighed after soaking 
and draining) 
1 tsp. saffron threads 
1 cup heavy cream 
Salt 
Pinch cayenne 
Ô cup snipped fresh chives 
Wash the mussels carefully, discarding 
any dead (open) ones and any that 
feel exceptionally heavy. In a large, 
nonreactive stockpot or Dutch oven, 
put 1 Tbs. of the olive oil, the carrot, 
celery, green parts of leeks, garlic, and 
peppercorns. Cook over medium 
heat, stirring frequently, for 4 min. 
without browning. Add the hard cider 
and the bouquet of herbs and bring 
to a rolling boil. Add the cleaned 
mussels. Cover the pot and cook for 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 49 ---
An extraordinary 
soup. Tender morels 
and succulent mussels 
are suspended in a 
rich, creamy broth 
scented with saffron. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
5 min., timing from the pOint when 
boiling begins again. 
Meanwhile, saute the morels and 
the white parts of the leeks in a skillet 
with the remaining 1 Tbs. olive oil 
for about 4 min. without browning. 
Strain the mussel broth through a 
mesh strainer or colander set over 
another nonreactive pot or saucepan. 
Gently crumble the saffron between 
your fingers and add it to the strained 
liquid. Add the cream, sauteed morels, 
and leeks and simmer until reduced to 
4 cups. Meanwhile, pick the mussels 
from their opened shells, removing 
the mussels' "beards" as you go. 
Add the picked mussels to the 
soup and season with salt and a 
pinch of cayenne. Remove the skillet 
from the heat, divide the soup 
among six soup plates, and decorate 
with some snipped chives. 
Sam Hayward is the executive 
chef at the Harraseeket Inn in 
Freeport, Maine. An amateur 
mushroom hunter, he looks for­
ward to spring's first morel harvest 
all winter long. • 
49

--- Page 50 ---
Slow, Rising Breads 
Start with a yeast sponge to make chewy, delicious loaves 
BY AMY SCHERBER 
I 'm a bread baker and I'm proud of that 
title. I enjoy getting my hands in the 
dough and shaping it into loaves. My 
greatest pleasure, however, comes from 
baking a beautiful loaf of bread for some­
one else to touch, taste, and enjoy. Some­
times I watch customers as they approach 
the counter: their eyes light up when they 
see the array of golden-brown breads and 
smell the sweet aromas of our offerings. 
While many factors come together to 
make great bread-tasty flour, careful han­
dling, and a good oven to name a few­
one of the most critical factors is time. If 
you want a loaf that is moist and chewy 
and has a complex flavor, you just can't 
hurry it along. 
I find the sponge method of making 
bread a good compromise between the 
quicker straight-dough method, which 
produces yeasty-flavored loaves, and the 
more involved sourdough process. I be­
gin by mixing flour, water, and a little bit 
of yeast to make a sponge; I let the sponge 
ferment for about eight hours, and then 
I mix it with more flour and other ingre­
dients to make bread dough. In addition 
to letting the yeast and flour ferment in 
the sponge, I give the dough a long, slow 
fermentation, too. Not only does this pro­
duce a moister crumb, but it also allows 
the flavor of the yeast to dissipate so the 
taste of toasty wheat and other ingredi­
ents comes forward. 
While this may sound like a lot of time 
to make one batch of bread, the actual 
work is only slightly more than when mak­
ing a straight-dough bread. Three of my fa­
vorite breads to make with a sponge starter 
and slow fermentation are chewy Walnut 
Honey Bread, crusty Whole-Wheat Cur­
rant Rolls, and a loose-textured Italian 
Bread (see recipes on pp. 52-53). You can 
Great bread takes time. Like sourdough bread, 
bread leavened with a sponge and allowed to 
ferment slowly will have a moist, chewy crumb 
and a crisp crust. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 51 ---
Yeast thrives in a goopy flour and water mixture. 
Vigorously stir the sponge with your fingers to 
introduce air. 
experiment with your own recipes too. 
The rule of thumb for a recipe that calls 
for one pound of flour is to use half the 
yeast, add 1 liz cups of sponge, and decrease 
the water by a tablespoon. 
A FLAVORFUL S PONGE F ROM 
YEAST, FlOUR, AND WATER 
A sponge starter, also known as a poolish 
in France and a biga in Italy, is made with 
yeast, flour, and water (see recipe on 
p. 52). In the bakery, I use fresh cake yeast 
because I like its mild flavor, but active 
dry yeast works fine and is more widely 
available. The yeast multiplies while the 
sponge ferments, so you don't need to put 
in as much yeast as you would if you were 
making a straight-dough bread. 
I recommend using unbleached white 
bread flour in the sponge rather than 
whole-wheat or rye flour because the 
sponge should be elastic and bubbly in 
order to lift the bread dough. White 
bread flour is high in gluten and produces 
this elasticity. 
The last ingredient is water. Breads 
around the world get much of their 
unique character from the local water. If 
you prefer not to drink the tap water in 
your area, you should use bottled water 
in your bread as well. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Temperature is important when mix­
ing the sponge. You want to dissolve the 
yeast in water that is between lOY and 
1 15°F. Water that's hotter than this will 
kill the yeast, and cooler water won't get 
the yeast going. For foolproof results, take 
the temperature of the water with an 
instant-read thermometer just before add­
ing the yeast. Stir the yeast into the water 
and let it stand for five minutes. The water 
will tum cloudy and the yeast creamy, but 
it probably won't be bubbly. Some people 
recommend putting in a Y4 
teaspoon sugar 
to kick-start the yeast. I don't like to use 
sugar in my breads or to get the yeast 
working too quickly, so I don't add sugar. If 
you want to see signs that the yeast is alive 
and active, stir in V2 teaspoon flour and 
wait ten to fifteen minutes. The yeast 
should start to bubble; if it doesn't, start 
again with new yeast. 
Once the yeast is dissolved, mix it with 
the remaining water into the flour. Stir 
with a wooden spoon or your fingers until 
you have a stretchy, sticky sponge dough, 
about 100 strokes (see photo at left) . 
SPONGES RIPEN AT ROOM 
TEMPERATURE 
After mixing, I transfer the sponge to an 
upright plastic container, which I cover 
loosely with plastic wrap so the sponge can 
breathe. I mark the level of the sponge and 
the time that I mixed it right on the con­
tainer. This way, I can monitor its progress 
as it rises and ferments. 
The sponge needs to sit and ripen at 
room temperature for about eight hours. 
You'll know that it's fully ripe and ready to 
use when it has risen up the sides of the 
container to about three times its original 
height and has begun to fall in the center 
(see photo at right) . The ideal ripening 
temperature for the sponge is 75°. If the 
room is colder, the sponge will take longer 
to ripen. If the room is warmer, it will fer­
ment faster. If you can't use the sponge 
within three hours of when it has fully 
ripened, cover it tightly and put it in the re­
frigerator. Before you use it, let it stand at 
room temperature for at least an hour. 
Since you'll only need 1 to 1 V2 cups of 
sponge for each batch of bread, you'll have 
enough sponge for several batches of 
dough. After about three days, the sponge 
will become excessively tangy and lose its 
leavening ability, but don't throw it out. 
Keep any leftover sponge in the refrigera­
tor (up to ten to twelve days) and add one 
cup of it to your next batch of sponge for a 
tangier, more complex flavor. 
S PONGE FOR FlAVOR, MORE YEAST 
FOR A PREDICTABLE RISE 
Although the sponge has a potent supply 
of yeast, I recommend adding a bit more 
yeast to the bread dough. It gives the 
sponge a boost and makes the dough rise 
more predictably, which is better for my 
schedule. If you don't want to add extra 
yeast, be sure to catch the sponge when 
it's fully ripe-when it has risen to three 
times its original height and has started to 
drop in the center. 
Once the dough is mixed, shape it into 
a ball, put it in a plastic container or a 
lightly oiled bowl, and cover it tightly. Let 
the dough rise for about an hour at room 
temperature for the flavor to begin to de­
velop, and then refrigerate the dough 
overnight (or for at least eight hours) to 
continue developing. The dough will keep 
in the refrigerator up to two days before it 
gets too sluggish. It's possible to skip this 
long fermentation, but if you shape and 
bake the bread after a short rise, you'll 
taste more yeast, the crumb won't be as 
chewy, and the bread won't be as moist. 
The next day, let the dough sit at room 
Bubbly sponge is full of yeast but doesn't have a 
yeasty flavor. After fermenting for eight hour.s, the 
sponge starts to drop in the middle, signaling that 
it's ripe and ready to be mixed into bread dough. 
51

--- Page 52 ---
See-through plastic containers are handy for 
keeping track of slow-rising bread. The author 
marks the time the sponge was mixed and its 
original height before leaving it to rise. 
Add chunky ingredients by kneading, not stirring. 
Currants and sesame seeds are sprinkled on the 
Whole-Wheat Currant Roll dough and then incorpo­
rated by folding the dough like a letter. More knead­
ing distributes them evenly throughout the dough. 
temperature until it begins to rise again, 
about an hour to an hour and a half Then 
shape the loaves, let them rise, and bake 
them as you would any other bread. 
SPONGE 
This sponge makes enough for two to three 
batches of bread, and it can easily be halved. 
Yields about 4 cups. 
1f2 tsp. active dry yeast (or 7 tsp. fresh yeast) 
1f2 cup warm water (105° to 7 75°F) 
71f2 cups room-temperature water 
7 lb. (31f2 cups) unbleached bread flour 
(or all-purpose) 
Stir the yeast into the warm water to dissolve; let 
the mixture stand for 5 min. to activate the 
yeast. Measure the flour into a bowl. When the 
yeast mixture is ready, mix it and the room­
temperature water into the flour. Stir with a 
wooden spoon or your fingers until you have a 
stretchy, sticky sponge, about 1 00 strokes. 
52 
Transfer the sponge to an upright 
plastic container and loosely cover 
with plastic wrap. Mark the level of 
the sponge and the time. 
Let the sponge rise at room 
temperature for about 8 hours. It 
will be fully ripe and ready to use 
when it has risen up the sides of 
the bowl to about 3 times its origi­
nal height and has begun to drop 
in the center. If you won't use the 
sponge within 3 hours, put it in the 
refrigerator. It will keep for 3 days. 
Before using it, let it stand at room 
temperature for at least an hour. 
WALNUT HONEY BREAD 
The walnuts naturally make the 
dough turn a beautiful subtle 
purple color, and the addition of 
walnut oil gives an even richer fla­
vor to the bread. Yields 2 loaves. 
1f2 tsp. active dry yeast (or 7 tsp. 
fresh yeast) 
1f2 cup warm water (1 05° to 7 75°) 
1f2 cup room-temperature water 
3 Tbs. honey 
41f2 tsp. walnut oil (or olive oil) 
7 cup sponge (see recipe at left) 
7 lb. (31f2 cups) unbleached bread 
flour (or all-purpose flour) 
7 Tbs. kosher salt 
7 1f2 cups walnut pieces, toasted 
2 Tbs. flour for decoration 
A sponge creates a moist, airy texture, and walnuts give the 
bread a warm hue. 
Stir the yeast into the warm water to 
dissolve; let the mixture stand for 5 min. 
Put the room-temperature water, honey, 
walnut oil, and the sponge in a bowl with the 
yeast mixture. Break up the sponge with your 
fingers and mix it for 2 to 3 min. until foam de­
velops. Add the flour and salt. Lift the moist in­
gredients over the dry, turning the dough in 
the bowl until the liquid is incorporated and 
the dough forms a thick mass. Knead for about 
1 min. in the bowl and then move the dough 
to a lightly floured surface. Knead for 5 min. by 
folding the dough in half, pushing down on it 
with the palms of your hands, and then lifting 
it and giving it a quarter turn. Use just enough 
flour on the counter to keep the dough from 
sticking. The dough will still be a little lumpy. 
Cover the dough and let it relax for 1 5 min. 
Pat the dough until it's flat and then sprin­
kle the walnuts on top. Fold the top third of 
dough towards you and the bottom third away 
from you, as if you were folding a letter. Give 
the dough a quarter turn and repeat the folds. 
Knead the dough for 2 min. Don't worry if the 
walnuts stick out-they'll be easier to work in 
once the dough has risen. Shape the dough 
into a ball and put it in a plastic container or a 
lightly oiled bowl. Cover tightly, let it rise for 
about an hour at room temperature, and then 
put it in the refrigerator for 8 to 1 2 hours. 
Remove the dough from the refrigerator 
and let it sit, covered, for 1 to 1 V2 hours. 
Briefly knead to work the walnuts into the 
dough. Divide the dough in half. Flatten one 
piece slightly, and then fold and push the out­
side edges of the dough into the center to 
make a round ball. Dust the flour off part of the 
work surface and set the ball on it, seam side 
down. To seal the seams, cup the ball with 
your hands and move it in a small circle against 
the work surface. Repeat with the other piece 
of dough. 
If you're using a baking stone in your oven, 
put the loaves seam side down and 3 in. apart 
on a baker's peel that has been sprinkled with 
cornmeal. Otherwise, put the loaves on a bak­
ing sheet that has been lined with kitchen 
parchment or sprinkled with cornmeal. Cover 
the loaves lightly with plastic film that has been 
crumpled first to keep it from sticking to the 
dough. Let the loaves rise for 1 V2 to 2 hours in 
a draft-free place until doubled in volume. The 
loaves will be fully risen when they feel light 
and airy when lifted slightly from underneath, 
and when a fingerprint pushed gently into the 
side of the loaf doesn't spring back. 
Heat the oven to 425°. If you're using a bak­
ing stone, heat it in the oven for half an hour. 
Just before baking, spoon 1 Tbs. flour onto 
the middle of each loaf for decoration. With a 
razor blade, gently slash an "x" on the tops of 
the loaves to allow a place for the air to escape 
and the loaves to expand. Put the baking sheet 
in the oven or slide the loaves from a peel onto 
the stone using a smooth, quick motion. 
Quickly spray the loaves and the oven 4 to 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 53 ---
5 times with water from a spray bottle. Mist 
again in 2 min. Bake for 30 to 35 min., until the 
loaves are golden brown and sound hollow 
when tapped on the bottom. 
WHOLE-WHEAT CURRANT ROLLS 
This dough has a beautifully smooth texture and 
becomes firmer about half an hour after mixing, 
when the currants absorb moisture from the 
dough. The rolls are slightly sweet and the 
sesame seeds make them crunchy. Yields 20 rolls. 
% tsp. dry yeast (or 1 'Iz tsp. fresh yeast) 
'Iz cup warm (105° to 115°) water 
I ll., cups room-temperature water 
1 'Iz cups sponge (see recipe at left) 
11 oz. (2'1z cups) unbleached bread flour 
(or all-purpose) 
7 oz. (1 'Iz cups) whole-wheat flour 
1 Tbs. plus 2 tsp. kosher salt 
'Iz cup sesame seeds 
1 cup currants 
Mix and knead the dough following the instruc­
tions for Walnut Honey Bread, adding the ses­
ame seeds and currants in place of the walnuts. 
The dough will be sticky, but don't use much 
flour when kneading or the bread will be dry. 
Use a pastry scraper to lift and turn the dough. 
After the dough has risen in the refrigerator 
and has come back to room temperature, divide 
the dough into 20 equal pieces. Shape each 
piece into a round ball on a lightly floured work 
surface. Put the rolls at least 1 V2 inches apart on 
a greased or parchment-lined baking sheet. Let 
the rolls rise in a draft-free place until doubled in 
size; this should take between 1 Y2 and 3 hours. 
Heat the oven to 425°. Put the rolls in, 
quickly spray the rolls and the oven 4 to 5 times 
with water from a spray bottle. Mist again in 
2 min. Bake for 30 to 35 min., until the rolls are 
golden brown and sound hollow when tapped 
on the bottom. 
ITALIAN BREAD 
This wet, sticky dough makes loaves that are airy 
and crunchy. Right before baking, tug on the 
risen loaves to stretch them out. Yields 2 loaves. 
% tsp. active dry yeast or (1 'Iz tsp. fresh yeast) 
'Iz cup warm (105° to 115°) water 
% cup room-temperature water 
1 '1z cups sponge (see recipe at left) 
17 oz. (3% cups) unbleached bread flour 
(or all-purpose) 
1 Tbs. plus 1 tsp. kosher salt 
Stir the yeast into the warm water to dissolve; let 
the mixture stand for 5 min. Mix the yeast mix­
ture, the room-temperature water, and the 
sponge with a paddle in a stationary mixer on 
low speed until foamy. Then switch to a dough 
hook and add the flour and salt. Knead the 
dough on medium speed for 5 min. It will be 
elastic but rough-looking. Let it rest for 15 min. 
and then knead on medium speed for 1 to 
Sponge breads are good keepers. The Italian 
bread (top), Walnut Honey Bread (middle), and 
Whole-Wheat Currant Rolls (bottom) will stay 
fresh for days. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
2 min., until the dough leaves the sides of the 
bowl cleanly. It will still be quite wet and sticky. 
Scrape the dough into a plastic container 
or a lightly oiled bowl. Cover tightly, let it rise 
for about an hour at room temperature, and 
then refrigerate it for at least 8 hours. 
Remove the dough from the refrigerator 
and let it sit, covered, for 1 to 1 V2 hours. 
Heat the oven to 450°. The dough will be 
very soft and sticky, so work on a well-floured 
surface. Divide the dough in half. Flatten one 
piece, gently pressing out some of the air 
bubbles. Fold the top third of dough toward 
you and the bottom third away from you, as if 
you were folding a letter. Use a pastry scraper 
to loosen the dough from the work surface. 
Press it flat, give it a quarter turn. Starting with 
the short end near you, roll it into a cylinder, 
pressing the seams shut tightly. Put the loaf, 
seam side down, on a baking sheet that has 
been very generously sprinkled with cornmeal. 
Repeat with the other piece of dough. 
Cover the loaves with crumpled plastic 
wrap and let them rise for about an hour. Just 
before baking, stretch each loaf to the full 
length of the baking sheet. Put the loaves in 
the oven, quickly spray them and the oven 
4 to 5 times with water from a spray bottle. 
Mist again in 2 min. Bake about 30 min., until 
they sound hollow when you tap them with 
your fingers. 
Amy Scherber makes crunchy loaves leav­
ened by both sponges and sourdoughs at her 
bakery, Amy's Bread, in New York City. •

--- Page 54 ---
Delighting in Wild Greens 
It may be a weed, but it might be delicious 
BY JOHN N. KALLAS 
Every spring, I plant a vegetable garden. But 
even before I select my seeds, weeds are already 
flourishing. I turn them under, and they come up 
again. Many sprout, flower, and fruit before I can har­
vest any of my garden crops. 
So if life gives you dande­
lions, what do you do? You 
make dandelion salad, soup, 
and wine, of course. Treat 
your weeds like nature's gar­
den of edible delights. In 
most gardens, about half the 
weeds are actually tasty, 
nourishing food. 
A WINDFALL HARVEST 
Here's what I do to harvest 
wild and cultivated plants 
from late winter through fall. 
First, in early spring I gather and use whatever edible 
weeds I find in my garden. Dandelions, thistle, and 
chickweed can often be found as soon as the snow 
melts. Then I turn and prepare the soil. I plant my 
corn, tomatoes, broccoli, peas, and whatever else 
strikes my fancy. 
Almost immediately, the weeds begin to grow. 
Throughout the growing season, I pull all the in­
edible weeds and toss them in the compost. I harvest 
the edible weeds as I need them, starting with those 
closest to my garden plants. This selective pulling 
gives the garden plants room to grow. As time goes 
on, the patches of wild edibles become smaller and 
smaller. When their number is severely reduced, my 
garden vegetables are just beginning to produce. I 
keep one place in my garden exclusively for weeds, 
however, so that I always have some to eat. 
Leaving weeds in the garden is not for the faint of 
heart. Your spouse may complain about your untidy 
habits. Your neighbors might think you're slovenly and 
lazy. But be brave: you'll enjoy fresh, unusual ingredi­
ents that will be the envy of all the best cooks in town. 
FIVE EDIBLE WEEDS 
The plants that follow are some of the most com­
mon weeds in the United States and Canada. They 
54 
green. Or use it in sandwiches, as 
you would alfalfa sprouts. 
are arranged in order of harvest. A cautionary note: 
don't pick wild plants for food in an area that has 
been sprayed with pesticides or herbicides, any­
where close to the driveway or road, or in any other 
questionable location. 
Chickweed (Stel/aria media)--Chickweed, like 
dandelions, can grow virtually all year round in 
moderate climates. It's a small plant with tiny 
leaves and flowers that grows in and around gar­
dens, among shrubs, and in lawns. Here are two 
ways to identify the weed: First, if you look closely, 
you can see a narrow line of short hairs running 
up each stem, sort of like a miniature Mohawk 
haircut. Second, if you look carefully at the tiny 
white flower, you'll see that what looks like ten 
petals is really five, so deeply split that they look 
like rabbit ears. 
Delicate in flavor and texture, chickweed doesn't 
hold up to cooking, but it's an excellent mild salad 
green. I use chickweed leaves and young stems just 
like alfalfa sprouts in salads and on sandwiches. 
For a continuous supply all spring, I harvest only 
the young growing leaves and stem ends. As each 
plant sends up new growths from the previously 
trimmed stems, I pick them. The older parts of the 
stems are stringy. 
(Conrinued on p. 56) 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 55 ---
Wild greens with a French accent 
BY G REG H IG G I N S 
At my restaurant in Portland, Oregon, 
I try to cook food that offers what the 
French call goUt de terroir-the flavor 
of the region. Wild foods such as the 
many types of greens, mushrooms, 
tubers, and shoots that grow in the 
Pacific Northwest and other regions of 
the country are delicious, and they add 
a special regional character to my food. 
Using ingredients grown or foraged 
locally means that the food is fresh and 
at its peak. It's also part of the wise use 
of our agricultural resources. 
SALMON WITH SHEEP SORREL 
SAUCE & DUMPLINGS 
You can use French sorrel if the wild greens 
aren't available. I recommend a Chardonnay 
that isn't too oaky or a Pinot Gris. Serves six. 
6 skinless salmon fillets, 5 oz. each 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
FOR THE DUMPLINGS: 
1 lb. russet potatoes, preferably Yukon Gold, 
unpeeled, scrubbed 
4 oz. sheep sorrel (or French sorrel) leaves 
(about 5 cups, lightly packed) 
14 cup olive oil 
3 egg yolks 
Yl cup semolina 
l-2 cup flour 
l-2 cup fine fresh breadcrumbs 
14 tsp. grated fresh nutmeg 
2 tsp. salt, more to taste 
Freshly ground black pepper 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
FOR THE SAUCE: 
3 cups fish stock (or 2 cups bottled clam juice 
and 1 cup water) 
2 Tbs. minced shallot 
1 tsp. minced garlic 
6 oz. sheep sorrel (or French sorrel) leaves 
(about 7 cups, lightly packed) 
l-2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
For the dumplingS-Simmer the whole 
potatoes in lightly salted water until tender 
enough to allow a knife point to easily pene­
trate to the center. Drain and cool slightly. 
Blanch the sorrel in boiling water for a few 
seconds and refresh in cold water. Drain thor­
oughly and press out excess moisture. In a 
food processor or blender, puree the sorrel 
with the olive oil and egg yolks. 
Cut the potatoes into smaller pieces and 
pass them through a food mill or a ricer (the 
skins will stay behind) into a mixing bowl. 
Add the semolina, flour, breadcrumbs, pureed 
sorrel, nutmeg, salt, and pepper to taste. 
Knead the mixture lightly until it comes to­
gether to make an even dough. Cover the 
bowl with a towel and let rest for 30 min. 
Lightly flour your hands and the work 
surface. Divide the dough into a few pieces 
and roll each piece into a 3/4-in. rope. Cut 
the ropes into 2-in. pieces. Roll the ends of 
each piece to taper them and make football­
shaped dumplings. 
Cook the dumplings in a large pot of boil­
ing salted water until they float to the top and 
feel firm, about 4 min. Remove with a slotted 
spoon, drain, and toss with a little oil to pre­
vent sticking. Use immediately or refrigerate. 
For the sauce-Combine the fish stock, 
shallots, and garlic in a small, nonreactive 
saucepan and simmer until reduced to about 
?3 cup. Put the sorrel leaves into the bowl of a 
food processor, add the hot stock reduction, 
and process about 30 seconds. With the 
motor running, gradually add the olive oil and 
salt and pepper to taste. Keep warm until 
ready to serve. The sauce may separate on 
standing, so whisk it well before serving. 
To finish the dish-Run your finger over 
the salmon fillets to find any pin bones and 
pull them out with tweezers or by pinching 
them between your finger and a knife. Season 
with salt and pepper to taste. Set up a steamer 
(or a large pot fitted with a rack), bring the 
water to a boil, put in the fish, cover, and 
steam until just barely done in the center, 5 to 
1 0 min., depending on the shape of the fillet. 
Meanwhile, saġte the dumplings in a 
little oil or butter in a nonstick pan over 
medium-high heat until they're heated 
through and slightly browned. Ladle some 
warm sauce on each plate, arrange a few 
dumplings on one side and a salmon fillet 
on the other. Decorate with more greens, if 
you like, and serve immediately. 
Greg Higgins cooked in Alsace and 
Burgundy before moving to Oregon, 
where he was the executive chef of the 
Heathman Hotel for nearly a decade. 
He recently opened his own restaurant, 
Higgins, in downtown Portland. 
55

--- Page 56 ---
Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)-Many for­
agers suggest that you pick only the earliest spring 
dandelion leaves (before the plant flowers) because 
the greens become bitter with age. Well, frankly, I 
don't care how early I pick them-they're always bit­
ter; they just get more so with time. If you like bitter 
greens, then try the young leaves raw as a 
salad. A basic oil-and-vinegar dressing 
helps to calm the bitterness. If you have 
only a moderate tolerance for bitter fla­
vors, you can cut early greens crosswise 
into narrow strips and sprinkle them onto 
a salad of milder greens, such as chick­
weed, lamb's quarters, or amaranth. Used 
sparingly, dandelion greens add punch but 
won't overwhelm. Boiling or sauteing 
makes the greens less bitter so that they 
can be used like cooked spinach. 
Dandelion flowers make an excellent 
addition to soups. They can also serve as 
an attractive garnish and can be eaten 
out of hand. Many children love to pick 
and eat them. Be careful to avoid the 
green bracts that surround the base of 
the flower, since they are extremely bit­
ter. Dandelion wine is made from the flowers. For a 
good wine recipe, check Euell Gibbons' Stalking the 
Wild Asparagus (see the sidebar opposite) . 
Bull thistle (Cirsium vulgare)-This unlikely wild 
edible is flavorful in spite of its ominous spines. Bull 
thistle is a biennial, which means it takes two years 
to complete its growth cycle. The first year that it 
grows from seed, it sends down a carrot-like taproot 
and sprouts a set ofleaves. The second year, it grows 
rapidly from its taproot into a four- to six-foot plant 
with stalks that bear both leaves and purple flowers. 
I collect the young first-year leaves and boil them 
for only a few minutes, enough to soften their spines. 
If the spines remain stiff after five minutes of boiling, 
I know the leaves are too old to eat. This plant gets 
increasingly fibrous, bitter, and stiff-spined with age. 
Because of the spines and hairs, I don't suggest you 
eat the leaves raw, regardless of age. 
The first-year taproot is entirely edible and makes 
an excellent cooked vegetable. By early spring of the 
second year, when the plant begins sending up its 
flowering stalks, the taproot is too hard and fibrous 
to eat. Unless you want seed, don't let bull thistle 
grow to maturity the second year, because it will 
draw nutrients and water from other plants. 
Sheep sorrel (Rumex acetosella)-Closely re­
lated to French sorrel (Rumex scutatus), which many 
people plant in their gardens, sheep sorrel is a small 
plant ranging from five to ten inches tall. Its leaves 
are shaped like long arrowheads, and the plant often 
has a reddish tinge, particularly when it reaches 
the flowering stage. Leaves vary in size from three-
56 
Dandelion's leaves and flowers are 
both edible. The bitter leaves add 
punch to a salad; they're also good 
cooked like spinach. 
quarters of an inch to about two inches long, and 
they never seem to become fibrous. 
The leaf of this plant has a vinegary, lemony flavor 
that makes it an excellent trail nibble, a good addition 
to soup, and a fine salad green (see recipes on p. 55). 
Because of their lemony flavor, sheep sorrel leaves 
(either fresh or dried) make an excellent herbal sea­
soning for meat, poultry, and fish. I lay fresh leaves on 
the food before cooking or sprinkle dried leaves over 
the surface. The dried leaves also make a good tea. 
Purslane (Portulaca oleracea)-Purslane is a suc­
culent, persistent groundcover. Its reddish stems re­
semble networks of miniature pipes running along 
Bull thistle offers 
edible leaves, 
which need boiling 
to soften, and a 
carrot -like taproot. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 57 ---
Sheep sorrel has the 
same lemony flavor as 
French sorrel. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
the ground. The green leaves are 
tear-shaped and thick. 
I use the whole aboveground plant 
when young, though the youngest 
stems are the choicest morsels. Purs­
lane is excellent as a salad green and 
as an addition to soups and stews. 
The slightly slimy mouth-feel (similar 
to okra) of the raw plant may turn 
some people off, but the mild vin­
egary flavor is pleasant. The fresh 
green leaves and reddish stems make 
a pretty garnish for the dinner plate. 
Purslane is relatively high in iron and 
omega-3 fatty acids. 
PLAY IT SAFE 
A few basic rules apply to gathering 
and eating any wild food: 
• Because some poisonous plants 
look like edible ones, correct identifi­
cation is essential. The photographs in this article 
will help, but there is no substitute for having some­
one who really knows plants identify them for you 
until you're familiar with them. In some areas, you 
can take plants to your state's cooperative extension 
service for identification. Field guides can help if 
they have excellent photographs and drawings. 
• Some plants have both edible and poisonous 
parts, and so you must know which parts can be 
eaten. The tomato is a good example of this prin­
ciple in a domesticated plant: the fruit of the tomato 
is the only part of the plant that isn't poisonous. Buy 
a couple of books on wild edible plants and try only 
Purslane's tart flavor works in 
salads, soups, and stews. 
FOR FURTHER READING 
Selected Weeds of the United States. Agricultural 
Handbook No. 366, ARS, USDA Superintendent of 
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1 970. 
Handbook of Edible Weeds, by James Duke. CRC Press, 
Inc., Boca Raton, FL, 1 992. 
A Field Guide to Edible Wild Plants (Eastern/Central North 
America), by Lee Allen. Guide #23. Houghton Mifflin Co., 
Boston, MA, 1 977. 
Nature Bound Pocket Field Guide, by Ron Dawson. 
OMNlgraphics Ltd., Boise, ID, 1 985. 
Stalking the Wild Asparagus, by Euell Gibbons. David 
McKay Co., Inc., New York, NY, 1 962. 
Wild Edible Plants of the Western United States, by Donald 
Kirk. Color edition. Naturegraph Publishers Inc., 
Healdsburg, CA, 1 975. 
those parts that are mentioned as safe to eat. You'll 
be happy to know that no part of any of the plants 
described in this article is poisonous. 
• Know the season or stage when the plants 
should be picked. Some fruits are poisonous until 
ripe. Others become poisonous, fibrous, or bitter 
with age. 
• Learn the minimum preparation required to 
make the plant edible or palatable. Many wild 
foods can be eaten raw, but some need cooking or 
other processing. 
• Whenever you try any food for the first time, you 
run the risk of a reaction. In rare cases, the weeds 
listed in this article may cause 
mild gas or a queasy stomach. 
People with food allergies 
should be as cautious as they 
are with any new food, partic­
ularly if it contains pollen. 
• If you plan to study wild 
foods, you should look up 
each one and refer to it by the 
Latin name. The unique plant 
name will reduce your chances 
of confusing species that have 
the same moniker. For in­
stance, both wild carrot and 
poison hemlock are called 
Queen Anne's lace. I certainly wouldn't want to get 
these two plants mixed up. 
John Kallas has a Ph.D. in nutrition and has been 
researching wild foods, teaching about them, and 
leading expeditions to gather them for more than fif­
teen years. He owns Wild Food Adventures in 
Portland, Oregon. • 
57

--- Page 58 ---
58 
I 
make very elaborate cakes, but they're based on 
a simple philosophy: the cake must taste great 
and look great. I make that happen by designing 
cakes that give our senses what they want---contrast 
in flavors, textures, and colors. I pair dark colors 
with light ones, play flat and glossy surfaces against 
each other, offset acidic flavors with mild ones, and 
use bitterness to counterbalance sweetness. 
Even though my cakes are complex, they're not 
out of the reach of an enthusiastic home cook. Care­
ful planning, the right equipment, and a thorough 
review of the recipe (days before you want to serve 
the cake) is all it takes to make beautiful cakes like 
this Floating Raspberry White Chocolate Mousse 
Cake. Best of all, you'll have the satisfaction of cre­
ating something that tastes better and is probably 
more attractive than anything you could buy at your 
local bakery. 
T I M I N G I S EVERYTH I NG 
The cake has four separate components---cake base, 
mousse, raspberry puree, and dark chocolate glaze-
FI E COOKI G

--- Page 59 ---
A sieve is aI/ you need to create a smooth berry sauce. Frozen 
raspberries are softened, pureed, and sieved to create a rasp­
berry sauce. The sauce is the base for the cake's "floating " 
raspberry center. 
but none are difficult to make. The trickiest element 
is timing the preparation. Even the most experi­
enced pastry chef couldn't whip up this cake in one 
day (see the sidebar at right) . You can spread the 
cake's preparation over as few as three days to as 
long as two weeks. In any case, follow the recipe's 
guidelines regarding advance (or last-minute) prep­
aration and assembly. If the finished cake is well 
wrapped, you can freeze it for over a week with no 
quality loss. Once defrosted, it should be eaten 
within a couple of days. 
This white chocolate mousse cake has every­
thing it needs to be a great dessert. The base is a 
chocolate cake made with almond paste. It's dark 
and moist, mildly sweet, and has the distinctive 
flavors of chocolate and almond. The delicate white 
chocolate mousse is light, soft, and mellow in both 
sweetness and flavor. However, the mousse suspends 
a raspberry puree that's been set with a touch of 
gelatin. This fruit layer is intense in both its color 
and its acidic flavor. The final touch is a glaze of 
melted chocolate on top of the cake; it provides a 
startling bittersweet chocolate flavor, firm texture, 
and color that stands out in contrast to the white 
chocolate mousse. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
FLOATING RASPBERRY WHITE 
CHOCOLATE MOUSSE CAKE 
The list of equipment you'll need is neither 
long nor unusual, but these pieces are vital. 
You should have an electric mixer; several 
stainless-steel mixing bowls; a rubber spatula; 
a whisk; a 7-in. springform pan; an 8-in. cake 
pan; and a flat, narrow spatula about 9 in. 
long. Serves ten. 
RASPBERRY PUREE 
This part of the recipe calls for an 8 -in. cake pan 
because that's the round pan most people have. 
However, since you 'll only need a S Y2-in. circle of 
puree, you won 't use all the puree. Use a smaller 
round pan if you have one; just fill it to a depth 
of J;:, in. 
12-oz. package frozen raspberries 
1 Y2 tsp. unflavored powdered gelatin 
Y.! cup sugar 
Line an 8-in. cake pan with plastic wrap, 
leaving about 4 in. of excess plastic hanging 
over the pan's sides. 
Defrost the berries until soft. Puree them 
in a food processor for about 30 seconds, or 
until smooth. Set a fine sieve over a small, 
nonreactive saucepan. Pour a small amount of 
the raspberry sauce in the sieve and force it 
through with a spatula. Repeat the process 
until you have strained all the raspberry puree. 
Sprinkle the gelatin over the puree. Allow 
the gelatin to soak and soften, about 5 min., 
and then stir. Heat the puree over medium 
heat and continue stirring until the gelatin 
melts completely. Add the sugar and stir until 
dissolved. Cool the raspberry mixture slightly 
and pour it into the plastic-lined cake pan. 
Freeze for an hour or until just set, and then 
drape the excess plastic over the top of the 
puree. Continue freezing for at least 1 2 hours. 
If you won't be using the puree within 
24 hours, prevent freezer burn by popping it 
out of the pan and completely wrapping it in 
plastic or putting it in a plastic bag. 
CHOCOLATE CAKE 
The almond paste in this recipe keeps the cake 
moist. 
1 large egg, room temperature 
4 large egg yolks, room temperature 
4 oz. (about ƀ cup plus 1 Tbs.) almond paste, 
crumbled 
ƀ cup confectioners' sugar 
2 Tbs. aI/-purpose flour 
ƀ cup unsweetened cocoa 
1 tsp. sugar 
1 oz. (2 Tbs.) unsalted butter, melted and 
cooled 
CAKE COUNTDOWN 
While this isn't a dessert you can 
whip up on a whim, you'll be 
surprised at how simple it is to 
make this cake when you break 
down the recipe into its basic 
components. No matter how 
you stagger the preparation, each 
step should be done within the 
recommended timetables. 
Raspberry puree-two weeks 
to one day before assembly. 
Chocolate cake-one week to 
one day before assembly. If you 
make the cake more than two 
days in advance, remove the cake 
from the pan and wrap it in plastic 
to keep it moist. 
White chocolate mousse­
immediately before assembly. 
When you make the mousse, the 
cake and puree should already 
be prepared. 
Assembly-one week to nine 
hours before serving. If you're 
going to assemble the cake more 
than 48 hours before serving it, 
wrap the assembled cake and 
freeze it. Defrost it in the re­
frigerator overnight before you 
glaze it. 
Chocolate glaze-at least an 
hour before serving, but you must 
pour it on the cake immediately. 
The glazed cake may wait in the 
refrigerator for one day to an hour 
before serving, or you may wrap it 
and freeze it for a week. The cake 
should be frozen only once, 
however, so if you've frozen it 
during an earlier stage, don't 
freeze it again. 
59

--- Page 60 ---
An impressive effect from a simple 
technique. To make the raspberry 
puree "float, " begin by spooning 
half of the white chocolate mousse 
over the coke layer in the spring form 
pan. Set the circle of raspberry puree 
in the pan 's center and push it into 
the mousse until the puree is at the 
middle of the pan. The mousse will 
rise around the puree and up the 
pan's sides. 
Covering the evidence. To complete 
the illusion of the floating raspberry, 
add the remaining mousse to the 
spring form pan; it will exceed the top 
of the pan. Then use the pan's edges 
to guide a large metal spatula across 
the top of the cake to smooth it. 
60 
Heat the oven to 400°F. Butter and flour only 
the base of a 7-in. springform pan, or line it 
with a circle of kitchen parchment. 
Put the egg, yolks, almond paste, and 
confectioners' sugar in the bowl of an elec­
tric mixer. Mix at medium-low speed until 
smooth, thick, and pale, about 5 min. 
Sift together the flour, cocoa, and sugar. 
Add these to the egg mixture and stir until 
just combined. Add the butter and mix for 
another 5 seconds, or until just combined. 
Spoon the batter into the pan; it will be 
very stiff. Smooth the top. Bake the cake for 
8 min., or just until firm to the touch; do not 
overbake. (When you insert a toothpick, it 
will come out with wet crumbs.) Cool it 
completely and, with the cake still in the 
pan, cover the top of the pan with plastic 
wrap. Store it in the refrigerator until you're 
ready to use it. 
You don't need to remove the cake from 
the pan unless you're making it more than 
two days in advance of assembly. In that 
case, release the cake from the pan, thor­
oughly wrap the cake layer in plastic, and 
keep it in the refrigerator. 
WHITE CHOCOLATE MOUSSE 
An airy texture is key to the mousse's role in 
the dessert, so be careful when whipping 
the heavy cream. When using an electric 
mixer, there's very little time difference 
between whipped cream that's just shy of 
stiff peaks and cream that's on the verge of 
becoming butter. 
8 oz. good-quality white chocolate 
(J prefer Callebaut), chopped fine 
Ô cup water 
1 envelope unflavored powdered gelatin 
2Õ cups heavy cream 
Put the chocolate in a metal bowl (1 qt. or larger) that 
will fit snugly over a saucepan. (You also can use a 
double boiler.) Fill the saucepan with 1 in. of water and 
heat it until it's on the verge of simmering. Remove the 
pan from the heat and set the bowl of chocolate on top 
of the saucepan. Stir the chocolate with a rubber spatula 
to encourage melting; however, don't be concerned if 
the chocolate doesn't melt entirely. 
Pour % cup water in another saucepan and sprinkle 
in the gelatin. Let the gelatin soak for 5 min., and then 
set the saucepan over medium heat and stir until the 
gelatin dissolves. 
Pour V2 cup of the cream in another small saucepan 
and bring it to a boil. Remove the saucepan from the 
heat immediately. 
Add the gelatin to the hot cream and stir until well 
mixed. Add this mixture to the melted chocolate and stir 
well with a spatula until the mixture is very smooth. Re­
move the bowl from the pan and allow the chocolate 
mixture to cool until it's just warm. 
Use an electric mixer to whip 2 cups cream until it 
just holds stiff peaks. Use a rubber spatula to gently fold 
half of the whipped cream into the slightly warm choco­
late mixture. Add the remaining whipped cream and 
fold gently until smooth. Don't overfold the mixture; it 
should still have a few distinct streaks of white chocolate 
and whipped cream. 
CHOCOLATE GlAZE 
Don 't be nervous about pouring chocolate over your beauti­
ful smooth, white cake; not only will it make your dessert 
prettier, but it 's also a lot of fun. The honey is optional, but 
it adds a subtle flavor and sheen to the glaze. 
1 oz. good-quality dark chocolate (J prefer 
extra-bittersweet Callebaut), chopped fine 
Y.l cup heavy cream 
1 tsp. honey (optional) 
Put the chocolate in a small bowl. Heat the cream and 
honey in a small saucepan until simmering, and then re­
move the pan from the heat. Very slowly, pour a thin, 
steady stream of the hot cream onto the chocolate, stir­
ring constantly with a rubber spatula until the glaze 
reaches the desired consistency. (Don't use a whisk; it 
creates unwanted air bubbles.) You probably won't use 
all the cream; you want just enough to create a glaze 
that is fluid enough to pour easily but has enough body 
to set properly. The mixture should be slightly thicker 
than heavy cream. 
ASSEMBLING THE CAKE 
Remove the cake in the springform pan from the refriger­
ator. (If you've already removed the cake from the pan, 
unwrap the cake layer and put it back in the pan now.) 
Spoon in half of the white chocolate mousse over the 
cake layer, until the mousse fills the springform pan a 
little more than halfway. Use a rubber spatula to smooth 
the mousse. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 61 ---
Hot cream and good chocolate create a glossy glaze. 
Start by slowly pouring the simmering cream onto finely 
chopped chocolate. Stir until smooth with a rubber spatula­
don't use a whisk, which would create air bubbles. Add a little 
more cream, if necessary, to the melted chocolate to make a 
glaze that has body but is fluid enough to pour easily. 
Remove the raspberry puree from the freezer and un­
wrap it. Use a 5V2-inch flan ring to cut a smaller circle 
from the puree. (You also can use a small plate as a tem­
plate, or merely "eyeball" it, and cut a circle with the tip 
of a sharp knife.) Lay the puree circle in the center of the 
springform pan and push it into the mousse until it 
"floats" approximately in the middle of the pan (see top 
photo at left). The mousse should begin to rise around 
the puree and up the pan's sides. Add the remaining 
mousse; it should slightly exceed the top of the pan. 
Using the pan's edges as a guide, scrape a large metal 
spatula across the top to remove the excess and to 
smooth the top of the mousse (see bottom photo at left). 
Put the cake, uncovered, in the refrigerator for about 
an hour to let the mousse set, and then cover the top 
with plastic wrap. The cake must be refrigerated for at 
least 8 hours before glazing. At this point, you can also 
freeze the cake for up to a week. (If you do freeze it, you 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
must defrost it in the refrigerator overnight 
before you glaze it.) 
Remove the cake, still in the pan, from 
the refrigerator. Pour the hot glaze on top. 
(If the glaze isn't fluid enough to run easily 
over the top of the cake, add a little more 
hot cream.) Rotate the cake so that the glaze 
covers the entire surface (see photo at right). 
Some of the glaze may drip over the pan; 
that's fine. If any bubbles appear on the 
glaze's surface, quickly and gently pierce 
them with the tip of a small, sharp knife. 
Return the cake to refrigerator for at least 
half an hour before you unmold it. 
When you're ready to serve the cake, 
loosen the pan by heating it gently with a hair 
dryer on medium heat, directing the hot air 
around the sides of the springform pan. Use a 
back-and-forth motion and be careful not to 
overheat. It should take no more than 1 0 to 
1 5 seconds for the pan to sufficiently loosen. 
Carefully slide the long, narrow spatula be­
tween the cake and the pan's sides to make 
sure the cake is ready to be removed from the 
pan. Unsnap the springform pan, remove the 
cake, and put it on a serving platter. 
To cut the cake, heat a thin, sharp knife 
with a hair dryer or the flame of a gas stove. 
Slice the cake gently using single downward 
motions, one piece at a time, and arrange 
the slices on individual plates. If you like, 
decorate with fresh raspberries and white 
chocolate leaves. 
Sebastian Brecht is a graduate of the 
French Culinary Institute in Manhattan. 
Once the pastry chef of four-star restau­
rants, he now supplies unique desserts to 
Dean & DeLuca, as well as to several 
catering companies. • 
Don't be afraid to pour warm 
chocolate on top of the cake; the 
chilled white chocolate mousse can 
stand up to the pressure. Pour the 
chocolate glaze on top of the 
mousse cake and rotate the cake so 
glaze runs and coats the entire sur­
face. Don't worry if the glaze drips 
over the pan 's edges. The cake 
needs just another half hour in the 
refrigerator before it's ready to serve. 
61

--- Page 62 ---
62 
A simple dish calls 
for a mild-mannered 
wine. When the soup 
is enhanced only by 
infused olive oil, a 
dry Riesling is the 
perfect match. 
One Soup, Four Wines 
A delicious experiment illustrates the logic 
behind matching wine and food 
BY JOSH EISEN 
How do you pair food and wine? There's end­
less talk about this question, and as a wine 
writer I've certainly added my opinion to the debate. 
But as a wine teacher, I've found that the best way to 
understand wine-food compatibility is to taste spe­
cific wines with specific foods. Tasting them your­
self is the only way you can decide what works best 
for you, and with some guidelines you can learn why 
a pairing works-or doesn't work. 
I've designed a wine and food tasting in which I 
serve one dish-a simple but flavorful white bean 
soup--with four very different wines. As the tasting 
progresses, I add new ingredients to the soup. This 
arrangement shows how the wine affects the taste of 
the dish and how different flavors in the food affect 
the taste of the wine. 
WI N E WITH FOOD: A BALANCING ACT 
Balance is key when creating a complementary rela­
tionship between wine and food. A perfect example 
of imbalance can usually be found at wedding recep­
tions. When you first toast the bride and groom, a 
dry Champagne tastes fine; but with the wedding 
cake, drinking the same Champagne becomes a 
mouth-pucketing experience. Eating cake makes the 
mouth want something sweet again, and a Cham­
pagne that isn't sweet comes as a sour shock. That's 
why a sweet dessert needs a sweet wine. 
Every wine presented here tastes good on its own, 
but your perceptions of the wine will change when 
you sip them with the soup. You'll find that each wine 
has its "moment" as the best, depending on which 
elements have been introduced into the soup. 
S U BTLE SOUP, DELICATE WINE 
Start the tasting with a small bowl of the basic bean 
soup flavored with a tablespoon of the infused oil. The 
first wine you'll try is a dry Riesling. (For specific wine 
descriptions, see the sidebar on p. 64.) This wine is 
aromatic, fruity, and delicate. The soup is silky, full­
bodied, and su btly flavored, and the olive oil gives it a 
complex and pungent aroma. The Riesling and the 
soup enhance, but don't overpower, each other. 
Try the next wine-a buttery Chardonnay that 
has spent time in new oak. Compared to the Ries­
ling, the Chardonnay has a heavy, rich, almost fat 
feeling in the mouth. Taste the Chardonnay with 
the soup and the soup's flavor seems to shrink in size. 
The soup's delicate aromas and silky texture are still 
there, but you have to look for them. The combina­
tion isn't unpleasant, but the wine is the dominant 
flavor. In conjunction with the Riesling, the soup 
was perfectly balanced. With the Chardonnay, the 
FI E COOKING

--- Page 63 ---
soup seems lackluster because the full body of the 
wine is out of balance with the delicacy of the soup. 
Follow the Chardonnay with the Cabemetl Merlot 
blend at room temperature. The wine and soup 
make a passable combination, but the wine obscures 
the beans' silkiness and subtlety-qualities that had 
been exciting and delicious with the Riesling. The 
red wine obscures the soup, but not in the same way 
as the Chardonnay. The Cabemet/Merlot has too 
much fruit and not enough acid, and the soft fruiti­
ness of the wine overpowers the simple soup. 
A RICH CHARDON NAY NEEDS BOLD FLAVORS 
Now grate about a tablespoon of Parmesan cheese 
into each bowl of soup-the scenario changes 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
completely. Suddenly, the Chardonnay comes into 
balance and is a stunning partner for the soup. 
This apparent change of heart happens because 
the cheese makes the soup taste richer and fuller, 
and the Parmesan's milk fat absorbs the wine's tan­
nins. The sweet richness of the Parmesan is a good 
balance for the Chardonnay's rich, vanilla fruit. If 
you taste the Riesling with this version of the soup, 
you'll find that the wine somehow has become 
weak and flat. 
Now try this incarnation of the soup with the 
Cabernet/Merlot blend. You'll find the combina­
tion has no special dimension; in fact, the soup 
tastes rather flat. Again, the problem is the wine's 
fruitiness, which still overpowers the dish. Even 
Author Josh Eisen 
pours the first wine in 
the tasting, a hands­
an demonstration of 
how wines and foad 
interact. The tasting 
calls for four different 
wines-the perfect 
number for turning 
the experience into a 
small dinner party. 
63

--- Page 64 ---
For a bolder wine, up 
the ante. The soup 
needs rich, sweet 
Parmesan to balance 
the Chardonnay's 
heavier, oaky flavor. 
the strong flavor of Parmesan doesn't give the soup 
enough strength to stand up to the wine. 
COM PLEX CONTRASTS CALL FOR A RED 
The final version of the soup incorporates a blend 
of slowly sauteed tomatoes, onions, and herbs 
(called 50fregit in Spanish) . When you add a couple 
of spoonfuls of this mixture to the soup, the dish 
changes altogether. Now there's a lush, succulent 
feel to the soup, with a full range of flavors. The 
tomatoes make the soup both sweeter and more 
acidic, and these qualities give the Cabernetl 
Merlot a springboard. The same qualities-fruiti­
ness and acidity-that made this wine a poor 
choice in other versions of the soup now can be 
enhanced. In fact, at this point it's best to serve 
this wine just cooler than room temperature to 
bring out its fruit flavors and make the acidity 
more prominent. Together, the soup and wine 
taste balanced and alive, and they're a pleasure to 
CHOOSING THE WINES 
A new addition makes 
the right wine choice 
go from white to red. 
A sofregit of slowly 
sauteed tomatoes, 
onions, and herbs gives 
the soup enough flavor 
..... - -" 
for a CabernetiMerlot. 
eat together. The wine seems bright and lively 
without dominating your taste buds or the soup. 
If you were to try this version of the soup with a 
white wine, the combination would be under­
whelming. White wines seem to wither and lose 
almost all their flavor in the face of acidic tomatoes. 
The final wine is another red-this time a Caber­
net Sauvignon that's rich, concentrated, and aged in 
new oak. Taste this pairing and you'll find the wine 
dominates. The Cabernet is just too heavy, earthy, 
and intense for the soup, even with the tomato, 
onion, and herbal flavors of the 5ofregit. The Parme­
san helps, but the combination is still merely fair, 
not dazzling. The lighter red wine more closely 
I used Trefethen wines in creating this wine and 
food test, but other wines can be substituted if 
they approximate the wines that I used in 
flavor, style, weight, and balance. Of course, 
the results will be somewhat different, but the 
fundamental transitions and differences be­
tween wines will still be apparent. To make the 
job of finding other wines easier, try to find a 
knowledgeable wine merchant. 
you can't find a Riesling, don't substitute 
Chardonnay or Sauvignon Blanc; instead, 
use a Pinot Blanc or a Pinot Gris. 
ripe tannins. It should be well balanced, 
easy to drink, and made without using new 
oak barrels. Look for an inexpensive, simple, 
and young red wine with lots of fruit and 
soft tannins. 
Here are the wines I used and suggestions of 
what to look for in choosing replacement wines. 
1 992 White Riesling Trefethen, or look for 
a dry young Riesling that's fresh and delicate. If 
64 
1 987 library Selection Chardonnay 
Trefethen, or try a fully evolved Chardonnay 
from the United States or a Burgundy such 
as Puligny-Montrachet. Look for harmonious 
balance between oak, fruit, and acidity, 
where new oak is not the dominant flavor. 
NV Eshcol Trefethen (68% Cabernet 
Sauvignon, 32% Merlot), or substitute a 
young Cabernet/Meriot blend, or a Cabernet 
with ample concentrated fruit and soft, 
1 989 Estate Reserve Cabernet 
Sauvignon Trefethen, or look for an out­
standing reserve Cabernet Sauvignon where 
the oak is not a dominant flavor. Look for good 
fruit concentration, elegance, and complexity 
in wines from the United States, Bordeaux, 
Australia, New Zealand, or Chile. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 65 ---
( 
Too much, too soon. A 
California Cabernet 
can be a fine wine, but 
it's too much for this 
soup. Save it for a lamb 
shank or a veal chop. 
matches the soup's level of richness and intensity. 
Save the Cabernet for a lamb shank or veal chop­
which could follow the soup. 
WHITE BEAN SOUP 
This soup is easy to make, and much of it can be prepared 
a day before serving. You can follow this soup with a simple 
main course such as grilled sausages, steak, or lamb. (Any 
of those dishes would be great with the soup's "losing" 
wine, a reserve Cabernet.) Yields 6 cups, which will serve four 
as a first course, or eight to ten in a tasting. 
1 l.2 cups dried white beans 
4 medium cloves garlic, peeled 
1 large sprig rosemary 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
Rinse the beans and soak them in 6 cups of cold water for 
8 hours or overnight. Drain and rinse the beans. Put them 
in a large, heavy pot and cover with 4 cups cold water. Add 
the garlic and rosemary sprig. Gently simmer, covered, for 
an hour, or until the beans are tender. When the beans are 
cooked, add salt to taste. 
Alternatively, do not soak the beans but put all the 
ingredients in a heavy flame- and ovenproof ceramic or 
enameled-steel pot. Bring to a boil on the stove and then 
put the pot in a low oven (about 250°F) and bake until the 
beans are tender. This will take 4 to 8 hours, depending on 
the freshness of the beans. 
The beans may be cooked a day or two in advance and 
stored, tightly covered, in the refrigerator. 
When ready to serve, remove the rosemary sprig and 
heat the beans. If you like, puree 1 or 2 cups of the beans 
and add it back to the soup. Add salt and pepper to taste. 
INFUSED OLIVE OIL 
This recipe is best with two olive oils: a "regular" light­
yellow oil and an extra-virgin, which should be deep 
green and very fragrant. The extra-virgin oil functions as 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
much as a seasoning as it does an oil. This can be made 
up to two days in advance and stored, tightly covered, in 
the refrigerator. Yields ?3 cup. 
!4 cup regular olive oil 
1 Tbs. minced garlic 
1 Tbs. minced fresh sage 
1 Tbs. minced fresh rosemary 
2 Tbs. minced fresh flat-leaf parsley 
!4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
In a small pot, heat the regular olive oil. Add the garlic 
and herbs. When the oil begins to sizzle, turn off the heat 
and let it sit; the herbs will have turned bright green. 
Allow the oil to cool a bit and add the extra-virgin olive oil. 
Stir and add salt and pepper to taste. The mixture should 
be heavily seasoned, as a small amount will flavor each 
bowl of soup. 
SOFREG/T 
A sofregit is one of the most basic elements in Spain's 
Catalan-style cooking. You'll need a heavy pan, a very low 
flame, and patience. The long, slow cooking makes the 
tomatoes and onions taste sweet, rich, and complex. The 
sofregit can be prepared five days in advance and stored, 
tightly covered, in the refrigerator. Yields I ll., cups. 
l-3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1 cup chopped onion 
1 Tbs. minced fresh garlic 
1 cup peeled, seeded and chopped plum tomatoes 
(fresh or canned) 
1 Tbs. minced fresh flat-leaf parsley 
1 Tbs. minced fresh sage 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
Heat a heavy saute pan and pour in the olive oil. When the 
oil is hot, add the onions and cook over low heat until they 
turn soft and golden brown, about 20 min. Stir in the garlic 
and cook until it begins to color slightly, about 5 min. Add 
the tomatoes and cook slowly until they begin to blend 
with the onions, about 20 min. Add the parsley and sage 
and cook for another 1 0 min. Season with salt and pepper. 
Josh Eisen is a freelance food and wine writer. He, his 
wife, a cat, and rrwre than 700 bottles of wine live hap­
pily in a one-bedroom apartment in New York City . • 
Soup accessories. 
Parmesan, infused 
olive oil, and sofregit 
all have a role in 
determining which 
wine best matches 
the white bean soup. 
65

--- Page 66 ---
Fragrant, Bungent 
Coriander 
Could this be the woild's 
most popular herb? 
BY CAROLY N HAYNES 
I t may sound funny, but to me, coriander is as 
essential to food as salt. Eaten raw, this flat, 
serrated leaf is fresh, pungent, and a little bit piny. 
Cooked, its flavor turns mellow and savory, and 
provides a warm background to other flavors. 
Fresh coriander is an indispensable part of daily 
cooking in most parts of the world, and it may well 
be the world's most popular herb. In North Amer­
ica, fresh coriander is finding its way into the

--- Page 67 ---
Keep coriander's 
bright, bold flavor 
under wraps. To 
preserve the aroma, 
flavor, and texture of 
the fresh herb, stick 
the roots and stems 
in a jar of water, 
cover the leaves with 
a plastic bag, and re­
frigerate (see photo 
at left). The coriander 
should stay fresh for 
at least a week. 
Assertive coriander 
turns subtle when 
cooked. You may not 
be able to tell that 
there's coriander in 
this dish of rice with 
pigeon peas (at right), 
but you'd miss it if 
it weren 't there. 
everyday repertoire of many cooks who fell in 
love with it when eating Mexican, Chinese, or 
Indian food. 
CILANTRO = FRESH CORIANDER 
Friends get impatient when I talk about "coriander 
leaves," insisting that the correct name is cilantro. 
Cilantro is in fact the Spanish word for coriander 
leaves. I've also heard it called Chinese parsley, 
and in Indian markets it's often called hara dhanya. 
Technically, "coriander" refers to the entire plant 
Coriandrum sativum. The leaves, roots, and seeds 
are all used in cooking, but they aren't inter­
changeable. The roots have a stronger, more bitter 
flavor than the leaves. Thai and Cambodian cooks 
use coriander root to flavor stocks and curry 
pastes. The light brown spherical seeds have an al­
together different taste. This spice is quite com­
mon in Indian curries, and it's also used whole to 
flavor pickles. Before you begin cooking a recipe, 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
make sure you're clear about what it's calling for­
fresh coriander or coriander seeds. 
You either love it or hate it. As hard as it is 
for me to believe, not everyone loves fresh corian­
der. Though taste experts aren't sure if it's a matter 
of genes or familiarity, for some people the smell of 
fresh coriander is fetid and the taste soapy. While 
the chemical components in coriander leaves are 
the same ones found in less controversial foods 
such as limes, experts believe that it is the propor­
tion of these coriander flavor components that 
may be sensed pleasantly by some and negatively 
by others. In other words, while most people love 
coriander, for some people, coriander just doesn't 
taste good. 
SM ELL IT BEFORE YOU BUY IT 
Contrary to what many cookbooks say, there's no 
adequate substitute for fresh green coriander 
leaves. Dried ones have already lost their flavor by 
67

--- Page 68 ---
the time they're fully desiccated, and parsley 
shares nothing with coriander except a deep-green 
color (though flat-leaf parsley sometimes looks a 
bit like coriander) . 
Good coriander leaves are extremely fragrant, 
so you should be able to smell them from a dis­
tance. Look for coriander that's tender, aromatic, 
and very green. It will keep longer if it still has its 
roots attached. To be sure that it is coriander­
not flat-leaf parsley-and that it's aromatic, lightly 
bruise a leaf to release the scent. Don't be taken in 
by beautiful looks: if it has no aroma, it will have 
no flavor. Avoid wilted bunches with yellowing 
leaves. While they may smell aromatic, they'll 
spoil quickly even when properly stored. They also 
won't be able to add that critical splash of green 
color that visually enlivens dishes. 
Keeping it fresh-Once you have fresh cori­
ander home, pick out any wilted leaves and put it 
in a jar like a bunch of flowers, with its roots or 
stem ends submerged in water. Don't wash the 
bunch before storing it-water on the leaves will 
hasten rot. Cover the leaves with a plastic bag and 
put the whole thing in the refrigerator. Change the 
water every two days or so, picking out any wilted 
leaves when you do, and the coriander will stay 
fresh for at least a week. 
When I don't have the refrigerator shelf space 
to spare for a jar of coriander, I wrap the leaves 
very tightly in aluminum foil and toss this airless 
package anywhere in the refrigerator. Another 
method is to wrap the coriander in a moist-not 
wet-paper towel and refrigerate it in a resealable 
plastic bag or an airtight plastic container. 
If you don't have easy access to fresh coriander, 
when you do get a bunch you can freeze the leaves 
instead of refrigerating them. Make a paste or a 
chutney in the blender with coriander, water, and, 
if you like, other flavorings (see recipe for Corian­
der Chutney, opposite) . Pour this mixture into ice­
cube trays, freeze them, and then transfer the 
cubes to a plastic bag. I have also had success stuff­
ing coriander leaves into ice-cube trays, filling the 
trays with water, and freezing. The leaves darken 
slightly and get soft, but the flavor stays strong. I 
use these leaves only in cooked dishes. 
Wash it with a dunk and a swish. If the cori­
ander still has roots attached, twist them off (save 
them if you're planning to cook Thai or Cambo­
dian food) . Carefully pick through the rest of the 
plant, removing any blackened, yellowing, or 
brown-edged leaves. To wash the dirt and sand off 
the leaves, dunk the coriander in a bowl of water, 
swish it around, and then let it float for a few sec­
onds. Take the leaves out of the water and repeat 
the process with fresh water until no grit is left on 
the bottom of the bowl. 
68 
Once the coriander is clean, gently pluck the 
leaves from the stems, being careful not to string 
along any tough fibers from the stem. There are 
those who recommend using only the leaves, but I 
am not a purist about this. Certainly don't use the 
stems if they're tough or woody. When using cori­
ander as a garnish, I use only leaves, leaving them 
whole or chopping them coarse. When I'm mixing 
a large amount of fresh coriander into a salad, again 
I'd use only the leaves. But when cooking corian­
der in dishes like the potato kebabs, I say use leaves 
and stems as long as both are tender and fresh. 
HOT AND BOLD FlAVORS 
COM B I N E WEll WITH CORIAN DER 
Once you have a sense of the aroma, appearance, 
and taste of coriander, start thinking of good combi­
nations. Fresh coriander belongs with tomatoes, 
onions, and hot green chiles, ingredients commonly 
found in Mexican and Caribbean food (see the 
recipes for Guacamole with Coriander and Yellow 
Rice with Pigeon Peas on p. 70) . Try coriander leaves 
in your favorite gazpacho or salsa recipe and you'll 
suddenly realize what's been missing. 
Let the dirt and sand 
fall away. To clean 
fresh coriander, pick 
out any wilted or 
yellow leaves, swish 
the leaves and stems 
around in a bowl of 
cool water, and then 
lift the herb out of the 
water, letting the grit 
sink to the bottom. 
Repeat until the water 
is free of grit. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 69 ---
Coconut and cori­
ander are natural 
partners. Blended to­
gether with chiles and 
lime juice, the pair 
make a hot chutney 
that enlivens fish, 
fritters, rice, or what­
ever else you choose 
to spoon it over. 
It's impossible to think of coriander without 
thinking of ginger. A standard Indian green masala 
(or fresh spice mixture) consists of fresh coriander 
leaves, green chiles, onion, ginger, and cumin. 
Saute the ingredients lightly in oil or butter, 
adding the coriander at the last minute, and then 
fold them into an omelet. Or let the same team of 
ingredients flavor a chicken, meat, or vegetable 
dish like the Pakistani potato kebabs (see recipe 
on p. 70) . 
Coconut and coriander also blend well together. 
The freshness of the coriander cuts through the 
creaminess of the coconut in preparations like 
Coriander Chutney. Toss coriander as a garnish on 
a Thai coconut soup where it collaborates with the 
flavors of the coconut, lemongrass, kaffir lime 
leaves, and galangal. 
Sprinkle chopped coriander over curries and 
vegetable dishes. Mix two or three tablespoons of 
chopped coriander into your favorite salad. Make a 
fresh green salsa by grinding large quantities of 
coriander leaves with lime, onion, green chiles, and 
garlic-or leave out the lime and stir raw rice into 
the paste and cook to make Mexican green rice. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
The more I experiment with this herb, the more 
convinced I am that you can never have too much 
fresh green coriander. 
CORIANDER CHUTNEY 
This thick paste is my friend Duchi's version of a tradi­
tional South Indian coriander-coconut chutney. If you 
have a mortar and pestle, try Duchi's method of crushing 
the coriander, coconut, and green chiles, and then add­
ing the lime juice, salt, and sugar. For a quicker version, 
throw the ingredients in a blender or food processor. 
Yields about 7 cup. 
I cup coriander leaves and stems, tightly packed 
I cup fresh or dried grated coconut 
I to 2 hot green chiles, cored and seeded 
2 Tbs. lime juice 
Õ tsp. salt 
I tsp. sugar 
I-in. piece fresh ginger (optional) 
I clove garlic (optional) 
Water 
Put all the ingredients except the water in a blender or food 
processor. Add % cup of water and blend. Scrape down 
the sides and keep adding water and blending until the 
mixture is a thick paste. The goal is to use just enough 
water to rehydrate the coconut but not so much that the 
paste is watery. 
69

--- Page 70 ---
YELLOW RICE WITH PIGEON PEAS 
(Arroz con Gandules) 
This is a classic Puerto Rican dish. Look for annatto (achiote) 
seeds and pigeon peas (gandules) in Latin American markets. 
Serves two to four. 
2 Tbs. oil 
7 \1 tsp. annatto (achiote) seeds 
l1 cup chopped onion 
\1 cup chopped green bell pepper 
2 cloves garlic, minced 
\1 cup chopped tomatoes 
7 Tbs. capers 
\1 tsp. cumin seeds, toasted and ground 
(or \1 tsp. ground cumin) 
7 tsp. salt 
\1 tsp. oregano leaves 
7 cup cooked pigeon peas (gandules) 
l1 cup fresh coriander leaves, tightly packed 
7 cup uncooked rice 
7 \1 cups water 
In a small pan, heat the oil over medium heat. Put the 
achiote seeds in for a minute-long enough to release their 
yellow color and flavor but not long enough to turn too 
brown. The oil should be a bright yellow-orange. Strain the 
oil into a medium saucepan, and discard the achiote seeds. 
Add the onion to the oil and saute until translucent, 
about 5 min. Add the green pepper and garlic, stirring 
lightly. Add the tomatoes, capers, cumin, salt, oregano, 
pigeon peas, coriander, and rice. Stir thoroughly over 
medium heat for 2 min. and then add the water. Stir 
frequently until the water comes to a boil and reduces 
until it's level with the rice. Turn down the heat to low, 
cover, and cook for another 20 to 25 min., until all the 
water is absorbed. 
PAKISTANI POTATO KEBABS 
(Alu Kebab) 
I like to use unpeeled Red Bliss potatoes for a nice texture 
and color. Although these kebabs are delicious plain, I rec­
ommend serving them with a mint or coriander chutney. 
Yields about 20 kebabs. 
7 \4 lb. (4 medium) red potatoes 
\1 tsp. salt 
\4 cup finely chopped onion 
4\1 tsp. finely chopped fresh ginger 
7 green chile, cored, seeded, and chopped fine 
Õ tsp. cumin seeds, toasted 
l1 cup chopped coriander leaves and stems, tightly packed 
6 Tbs. breadcrumbs 
2 Tbs. lime juice 
l-2 tsp. salt 
11l tsp. finely ground black pepper 
\1 cup clarified butter, vegetable oil, or combination of both 
Put the potatoes in a saucepan, cover with water, and add 
the salt. Cover and bring to a boil. Reduce heat and cook 
for another 1 5 min., or until the potatoes are thoroughly 
cooked and soft enough to mash. Drain and cool. 
In a large mixing bowl, mash the potatoes with a potato 
masher or a large spoon, leaving them a little chunky. Add 
the onion, ginger, chile, cumin seeds, coriander, bread­
crumbs, lime juice, salt, and pepper. Blend thoroughly, 
using your hands if necessary. Let this mixture stand for 
1 5 min. and then shape into small patties, about 2 in. in 
diameter and 1f2 in. thick, taking care to smooth out the 
edges so that the patties don't come apart as they cook. 
Heat the butter or oil in a heavy skillet. When it's sizzling 
hot, put as many patties in the pan as will fit without 
touching. Turn when they're crispy and golden brown, 
70 
about 3 min. Cook the other side until crispy, and remove 
from the pan with a slotted spatula. Drain on a cooling 
rack covered with paper towels. Fry the remaining kebabs. 
They're best served right away, but you can put them in a 
low oven to keep them warm. 
GUACAMOLE WITH CORIANDER 
If you've never put coriander in guacamole, try my version. 
This recipe is easily doubled. Yields almost 2 cups. 
\1 cup diced tomato 
2 Tbs. finely chopped onion 
7 green chile, cored, seeded, and chopped fine 
2 Tbs. lime juice 
7 ripe Haas avocado 
2 Tbs. plain yogurt (optional) 
\1 tsp. cumin seeds, toasted and ground 
\4 cup chopped coriander leaves, tightly packed 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
Marinate the tomato, onion, and chile in the lime juice 
while you prepare the avocado. Peel the avocado and 
mash it in a bowl with a fork until smooth. Stir in the 
yogurt, if using. Stir in the rest of the ingredients. Let sit 
for 1 5 min. for the flavors to blend before serving. 
Carolyn Haynes became fanatic about fresh coriander 
as a child when her family lived in India. She works in 
a refugee assistance program in Philadelphia. • 
It ain't guacamole 
without coriander. 
Fresh coriander, or 
cilantro as it's called 
in Spanish, adds its 
unmistakable flavor to 
many Mexican dishes. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 71 ---
Classic Creme Caramel 
A light touch and gentle baking make a silky smooth custard 
BY S U SAN M cCREIGHT LlNDEBORG 
My mother made terrific custard. Baked in 
brown ceramic cups with white glazed 
interiors, the top sprinkled with nutmeg, it was 
heavenly. I .ate her custard, hot or cold, straight 
out of the cup. But it wasn't until I was 16 years 
old while on a trip to Santa Fe, New Mexico, that 
I realized there was more to custard than mom's 
humble pudding. 
It was there, at the historic La Fonda Hotel, 
that I first tasted flan. The menu described flan as 
baked custard, but this flan wasn't like anything 
mom had ever made. Instead of in a cup, it was 
served on a plate, where it sat quivering in a pool 
of dark caramel sauce. That first bite slid across 
my tongue, and I was thrilled by the contrast be­
tween the rich eggy custard and the slightly burnt 
taste of caramel. I had no idea how flan was made, 
but I promised myself then that I'd learn. 
In the years since that night at La Fonda, I've 
made hundreds, probably even thousands of car­
amel custards, both at home and in restaurant 
kitchens. In that time I've learned that flan is 
simply the Spanish cousin of the French-born 
creme caramel, but made with sweetened con­
densed milk rather than whole milk or cream. At 
heart they are the same, an egg-rich custard baked 
in a caramel-lined cup, unmolded and served in 
its own sweet sauce. 
In its most basic form, custard is a mixture of a 
milk product (whole milk, half-and-half, cream, 
condensed milk, or skim milk) , sugar, eggs (with 
additional yolks sometimes added) , and flavorings. 
Alter the type of milk and the quantity of eggs and 
egg yolks, and you can change the texture and fla­
vor of the finished custard. 
It should be no secret that fat is the key to a 
Perfectly cooked creme caramel is silky smooth all the way 
through. just firm enough to hold its shape, the custard should 
quiver when you tap the plate. 
APRIL/MAY 1 995

--- Page 72 ---
72 
An even caramel coating is the goal, but work carefully-it's 
hot. The caramel will begin to set immediately, so work quickly 
and always hold the molds with a towel or a hot pad. Hot 
caramel can cause serious burns. 
creamy custard. However, the richest custards, 
made primarily of cream and egg yolks, are too soft 
to unmold. Without the proteins particular to egg 
whites, a custard won't set properly. Baked cream­
and-egg-yolk custards remain practically liquid 
and must be served in their baking molds. They're 
perfect for creme brulee, with a crisp layer of car­
amel on top. Custards made with 
condense and wash away any sugar crystals that 
might cling to the sides of the pan. 
Before you start caramelizing the sugar, arrange 
your molds so they're close at hand. Combine the 
water and sugar (see recipe below) in a separate 
mixing bowl, stirring until the sugar is almost dis­
solved, then pour the mixture directly into the 
center of the saucepan. This may seem like an un­
necessary step, but it will help you avoid getting 
sugar crystals on the sides of the pan, where they 
may not dissolve. A single undissolved sugar crys­
tal can start a chain reaction, promoting the for­
mation of others until the entire caramel mixture 
becomes grainy. 
Bring the sugar water to a boil and, as an extra 
precaution, dip a small 0 - to 1 Yz-inch) pastry 
brush in cold water and brush around the inside 
of the pan. Cover the pan and boil 1 minute to 
make sure no sugar crystals remain. Do not stir. 
Uncover and continue boiling until the sugar be­
gins to color. Gently swirl the pan over the heat 
until the caramel is medium-dark brown. A light­
colored caramel hasn't enough flavor, and a really 
dark caramel tastes burned. Once the sugar starts 
caramelizing, watch it closely so that you can stop 
it at the just the right moment. Sugar starts to 
color at 3 10°F; at 338° it starts to burn; and it will 
be completely black at 350°. The total cooking 
time is about 10 to 1 5 minutes. 
Pay attention: it's hot and sets quickly. Don't 
let yourself get distracted when making 
CREME 
CARAMEL 
CARAMEL: 
1!:z cup water 
Y.t cup sugar 
sweetened condensed milk (like my 
first {Lan) are part of the cuisines of 
Central America and Southeast Asia. 
Condensed-milk custards are sweet and 
have a rich texture similar to those 
made with heavy cream. 
At the other end of the scale, custards 
made with skim milk and few egg yolks 
set up and unmold very easily. Their tex­
ture is as smooth as any custard made 
with whole milk and whole eggs, but they 
don't taste as rich. 
BASIC CUSTARD: 
caramel. Hot sugar can cause serious 
burns. Once the color is right, quickly 
pour the caramel into the molds, divid­
ing it as evenly as possible. Ceramic 
molds can be individual size, or large 
enough for an entire recipe of custard. I 
prefer flat-bottom molds with straight 
sides. They produce a good-looking 
creme caramel, and they unmold more 
easily than molds with smaller bottoms 
and sloping sides. 
In my opinion the best creme caramel 
is made with whole milk and whole eggs 
with a few extra yolks added for richness. 
The texture is silky smooth and deli­
ciously rich. 
MAKE THE CARAMEL WITH CAUTION 
Yields 3 cups custard 
(enough for eight 
1!:z-cup molds or 
one 7 -quart mold). 
21/J cups whole milk 
3 whole eggs 
3 egg yolks 
1!:z cup sugar 
2 tsp. vanilla extract 
(or 1!:z vanilla bean, 
split and scraped) 
Pinch of salt 
As you pour the caramel into the 
molds, you'll notice that the caramel in 
the last mold filled will be darker than 
that in the first. That's because the sugar 
continues to cook from the residual heat 
in the pan. You want to work quickly, so 
Use a heavy, 1 - to 1 Yz-quart saucepan with a flat 
bottom and a snug-fitting lid to cook the caramel. 
The characteristics of the pan and lid are important. 
A level bottom helps the sugar cook evenly, and a 
heavy pan is less likely to have hot spots, which 
could allow the sugar to burn. Be sure the lid is tight 
enough to capture the steam. You want the steam to 
the caramel won't overcook before you 
get it into the molds. Once you've poured all the 
caramel, pick up each mold and tilt it so that the 
caramel covers the bottom evenly and starts to run 
up the sides. Use a hot pad or towel to hold the 
molds-they wit! be hot. If the caramel is too light or 
too dark, soak the molds to remove the caramel and 
make a new batch. You haven't lost anything at this 
point, and the experience will help you find the right 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 73 ---
Stir, don't whisk, the custard base. Use a regular spoon to mix 
the sugar, eggs, and milk to avoid beating in air bubbles that 
can ruin the custard's texture. 
color. (See Fine Cooking # 1 , pp. 35-39, for more 
information on making caramel.) 
STI R G ENTLY, BAKE G ENTlY 
To make the custard, heat the milk until it just 
barely simmers; boiling milk can curdle the eggs. 
While the milk is heating, gently combine the eggs, 
sugar, vanilla extract, and salt in a bowl. Use a small 
spoon-not a whisk-to mix the eggs. You want just 
to combine the ingredients without beating in any 
air that can leave bubbles in your custard. Slowly 
pour the heated milk into the egg mixture without 
splashing, stirring gently all the while. 
Pour the custard through a fine sieve into the 
caramel-lined molds, filling to just below the rim. 
The sieve will remove any undissolved sugar and egg 
particles and ensure the smoothest possible custard. 
Let the custard base sit in the molds undisturbed for 
about five minutes to allow any bubbles to collapse. 
With the tip of a small knife, gently deflate any re­
maining bubbles clinging to the edge of the molds. 
Heat the oven to 300°. Cooking the egg-rich cus­
tards at a relatively low temperature helps prevent 
curdling. Set the filled molds in a flat, shallow pan, 
not more than Yz to 1 inch deeper than your molds, 
to use as a water bath. Pour hot tap water into the 
pan until it reaches Yz to Y4 of the way up the sides of 
the molds. Cover the pan with aluminum foil to keep 
the tops of the custards from forming a skin, but take 
care that the foil doesn't actually touch the custards. 
Cooking time depends on the size and thickness 
of the molds. Large molds need more time than 
small ones, and thick-walled molds take longer than 
thin ones. Delicate Yz-cup molds cook in 25 to 
Straining the custard directly into the molds is added insurance 
30 minutes; thick-walled Yz-cup molds need 40 to 
that your custard will be smooth and creamy 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
73

--- Page 74 ---
74 
Pop the bubbles for the smoothest custards. Use the tip of a 
paring knife. 
Test for doneness towards the edge of the mold, not in the cen­
ter. The custards should still be slightly liquid in the center when 
you take them from the oven. They'll finish cooking as they cool. 
50 minutes. Experience will teach you how long it 
takes to bake custards in your particular molds, and 
in your oven. 
Be careful not to overcook your custards. Once 
their soft texture has been ruined, there's no way 
to get it back. Slow cooking and cooling gives you 
the best chance of achieving quiveringly perfect 
creme caramel. 
Testing for texture. To test for doneness, slip 
a paring knife into the custard halfway between 
the edge of the mold and the center. If the knife 
comes out clean, the custard is ready to come out 
of the oven. The center should still be slightly 
liquid. Remove the water bath from the oven and 
loosen the foil to vent the steam, but keep the cus­
tards covered. Leave them in the water bath to 
cool at room temperature. The custards will finish 
cooking as they cool. 
If your knife comes out completely clean from 
the center of the mold (rather than halfway be­
tween the center and the edge) and the custard 
seems fairly solid, then the custard is already fully 
cooked and should be cooled quickly on a rack. Air 
cooling is faster than cooling in the water bath and 
will minimize further cooking. Overcooked cus­
tards begin to puff after they set and will form a 
skin even if covered. 
When the custards reach room temperature, 
cover them tightly with plastic wrap (again to pre­
vent a skin from forming) and refrigerate them for at 
least 24 hours. This resting period allows the cus­
tards to set completely and for the caramel to melt, 
making unmolding easier. 
Just before serving, remove the molds from the 
refrigerator. Carefully run your thinnest paring knife 
around the edge of the mold to loosen the custard. 
Keep the knife blade flat against the side of the mold. 
Cutting into the custard will result in ragged edges 
and leave pieces of custard floating in the sauce. Tap 
the mold with the heel of your hand to finish loosen­
ing the custard. If you see caramel sauce between 
the custard and the side of the mold, you know your 
custard is loose. 
Invert a serving plate on top of the mold, and 
turn the whole thing upside down. The custard 
should release itself. If suction prevents the custard 
from releasing, gently tap on the bottom of the mold 
or gently hit the heel of your hand against the side 
of the mold. Be sure to let all the melted caramel 
drizzle from the mold over the custard. 
Look closely at the texture of the custard and take 
mental notes for fine-tuning your technique. The 
custard should be perfectly smooth with very few air 
bubbles. Gently hit the heel of your hand against the 
serving plate. The custard should quiver-the sign of 
a silky, smooth texture. A custard that's underdone 
will break in the unmolding or won't hold its shape 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 75 ---
Variations on creme caramel 
Make coffee-flavored creme caramel, like the one pictured below, 
by dissolving instant espresso in the milk. To make citrus- or 
ginger-flavored custard, heat the milk to just below a simmer, 
add the flavoring, and remove from the heat. Cover the pot and 
let the milk steep for about 30 minutes. Gently reheat the milk 
to a slow simmer before combining it with the eggs and sugar. 
on the plate. An overdone custard will barely wiggle, 
even when the plate is hit hard. 
To develop your technique, make creme caramel 
and its variations your specialty for several months. 
Each batch will teach you something new about the 
amazing egg and its ability to turn sugar and milk 
and a bit of flavoring into a truly perfect dessert. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Susan McCreight Lindeborg started her cooking career 
in pursuit of the perfect flan by cooking at La Fonda 
Hotel in Santa Fe. Later positions include chef at 
fEtoile in Madison, Wisconsin, and pastry chef under 
Bob Kinkead at Twenty-One Federal in Washington, 
DC. She is now the chef at the Morrison-Clark Inn, a 
small, historic hotel in Washington, DC. • 
CITRUS 
Zest of 1 large 
orange and 
zest of 2 lemons. 
Reduce vanilla 
extract to V2 tsp. 
GINGER 
2 Tbs. grated 
fresh ginger. 
Reduce vanilla 
extract to V2 tsp. 
COFFEE 
2 Tbs. instant 
espresso granules. 
Reduce vanilla 
extract to 1 tsp. 
Add 2 Tbs. coffee­
flavored liqueur 
(I prefer Tia Maria) 
to the egg-sugar 
mixture. 
75

--- Page 76 ---
BASICS 
Mayonnaise 
Homemade mayonnaise is a great way 
to boost the flavor of any recipe that 
calls for a cold, creamy sauce. The tech­
nique is easy to master and, once you 
have the hang of it, you can get creative 
with flavorings. 
Mayonnaise is the broad name for a 
family of classic sauces made by binding 
oil and another liquid together with egg 
yolks. The liquid is usually lemon juice 
or vinegar. Egg yolks are used to stabilize 
the emulsion and to keep the sauce from 
separating. Fresh eggs are essential in 
this preparation, as they lose their abil­
ity to stabilize the emulsion as they age. 
Mustard can help with the emulsion, 
but it will also contribute its own spicy 
notes to the mayonnaise. 
Choose a neutral, clean-tasting oil 
for basic mayonnaise: refined peanut, 
canola, and safflower oils all work well. 
For a more interesting flavor, substitute 
76 
Homemade mayonnaise is 
easy-and so much better 
than store-bought. From 
the top, Basic Mayonnaise, 
Rouille, and Ginger, Lime & 
Cilantro Mayonnaise (recipes 
on p. 78). 
a stronger oil for the 
last few spoonfuls. Wal­
nut, hazelnut, toasted 
sesame seed, and extra­
virgin olive oils are won­
derful accent oils. These 
strongly flavored oils 
can also be used in 
larger proportions, but 
they create very forceful 
mayonnaise. 
SLOW AND STEADY 
Making mayonnaise with 
a thin wire whisk in a 
nonreactive bowl is the 
simplest method and the 
best one for small quan­
tities. Whisking by hand 
provides the most con­
trol and is therefore the 
most reliable method. 
An electric mixer works 
best with a whisk attach­
ment. A food processor 
is quick but can be diffi­
cult to control: the steel blade tends to 
overwork the mayonnaise in a matter of 
seconds, producing a lightly colored, 
lumpy sauce. The shorter plastic "pastry" 
blade does less damage, but a food pro­
cessor should really only be used for 
large quantities-when whisking by 
hand isn't feasible. 
To start, lay a dishtowel under your 
mixing bowl to keep the bowl from spin­
ning away from you during whisking. 
This will free one hand so that you can 
pour from a measuring cup while whisk­
ing with the other hand. 
The key to making m ayo n n a i s e 
successfully is t o beg i n slowly. In a 
clean bowl, whisk together egg yolks, 
lemon juice or vinegar, salt, and pepper 
until frothy and almost double in vol­
ume. This initial step requires some en­
ergy, but it's necessary to get the emul­
sion off to a stable start. Next, while still 
whisking vigorously, slowly drip the oil 
into the yolks. The action of the whisk 
breaks the oil into thousands of tiny 
droplets which become suspended 
throughout the sauce. For this reason, 
it's important to whisk efficiently-in a 
tight, circular motion. The first YJ cup of 
oil is the most critical and requires the 
most attention. 
Once the yolks start to absorb the 
oil, you may add it in a light, steady 
stream. The sauce will become notice­
ably thicker. As more oil is incorpo­
rated, the sauce continues to thicken; 
adding any more lemon juice or vinegar 
will make it thinner. If you see a puddle 
of oil forming, stop adding oil and whisk 
the mayonnaise until all the droplets 
are worked into the yolks. The goal is 
to work up the emulsion smoothly, so 
that the oil is incorporated at the same 
rate it's added. 
Learning to avoid "breaking" emul­
sions and to repair those that have bro­
ken will come with some practice. An 
indication that the emulsion is about to 
break (separate) is when the mayon­
naise becomes so thick that it begins to 
clump up in the whisk. If this happens, 
stop adding oil and stir in a few spoon­
fuls of warm water or lemon juice to thin 
the mixture before you continue to add 
oil. If the mayonnaise separates com­
pletely, put a fresh yolk or a tablespoon 
of mustard (or both) into a clean bowl 
and begin whisking again with this as 
the base. Slowly add the broken sauce 
as if it were the oil. This will recreate a 
stable emulsion. 
G ETTI NG CREATIVE WITH flAVORS 
Seasoning a basic mayonnaise offers a lot 
room for improvisation. The bit of acid 
you add to the yolks at the beginning is a 
good place to start. Fresh lemon juice is 
superior to bottled, and a good-quality 
white-wine vinegar adds a lot of charac­
ter. Add up to a tablespoon of these acids 
for each egg yolk for a sharper flavor that 
will help cut the richness of the eggs and 
oil. Any mayonnaise should be adjusted 
for salt and pepper when finished. (You 
might want to try ground white pepper, 
which won't leave specks.) 
A classic flavor variation combines 
basic mayonnaise with fresh herbs, 
capers, and cornichons in remoulade, an 
(Continued on p. 78) 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 77 ---
118 8racken Road M
ALO S 
. ontgome 
(914]4S7-ɵ ɶWYOrk 12549-2604 
• Fax: (914]4S7 
All trade 
© 1994 AL
' 
-9083 
marks are the pr 
OS MICrographics Co 
operty of their respectiv rporation. 
e companies

--- Page 78 ---
BASICS 
excellent accompaniment to salads and 
cold meats. Other possibilities include 
horseradish, fresh herbs, curry powder, 
shallots, tomatoes, or fresh chiles. 
MAKE IT FRESH 
To lessen the risks associated with raw 
eggs, be sure to use eggs that have been 
kept cold. Once your mayonnaise is made, 
store it properly. Homemade mayonnaise 
should be covered and refrigerated imme­
diately after preparation and only kept for 
one to two days in the coldest spot in your 
refrigerator. The mayonnaise begins to 
lose its silkiness when refrigerated 
overnight, so it's best used right away. 
Many recipes recommend making may­
onnaise with room-temperature eggs be­
cause it's difficult to create an emulsion 
when the ingredients are cold. This isn't 
really necessary as long as your equipment 
and oil are not cold. 
BASIC MAYONNAISE 
Some chefs prefer to use more oil to produce 
a lighter colored and slightly thicker sauce. 
The proportions may be modified to include 
as much as % cup oil per large yolk but be­
yond that, the sauce will break. Yields about 
7 Y., cups. 
2 large egg yolks 
1 tsp. fresh lemon juice or white-wine vinegar 
l.7 tsp. Dijon mustard (optional) 
1 cup oil 
Salt and freshly ground white pepper 
Whisk the yolks, lemon juice, and mustard 
together until frothy. Slowly incorporate the 
oil one drop at a time. Season with salt and 
pepper to taste. 
ROUILLE 
This classic mayonnaise is traditionally spread 
on toasted bread and served with bouilla­
baisse, but it's also great with simple boiled 
potatoes. Rouille (pronounced roo-EE) actually 
means rust, which aptly describes its color. 
Yields about 1 Y., cups. 
1 red bell pepper, roasted, peeled, cored, 
and seeded 
2 large egg yolks 
1 tsp. fresh lemon juice 
Salt to taste 
J,t., cup vegetable oil 
Y., cup extra-virgin olive oil 
l.7 tsp. tomato paste 
Y., tsp. Tabasco (or other red-pepper sauce) 
Puree the roasted pepper and cook it in a non­
stick pan over medium heat for 3 to 5 min., 
until it's nearly dry. Stir frequently to prevent 
scorching. Set the pepper puree aside to cool 
while you make the mayonnaise. 
Whisk the egg yolks, lemon juice, and salt 
together until frothy. Slowly incorporate the 
78 
vegetable oil and then the olive oil. Combine 
the mayonnaise with the tomato paste, 
Tabasco, and pepper puree. Taste and adjust 
the seasoning. 
GINGER, LIME & CILANTRO 
MAYONNAISE 
The fresh ginger juice in this recipe gives this 
mayonnaise a slightly sweet taste and a little 
bit of bite. This mayonnaise has lots of flavor 
and adds a decidedly tropical touch to simply 
grilled boneless chicken breasts. Yields about 
1l.7 cups. 
2 large egg yolks 
1 Tbs. fresh lime juice 
Salt and freshly ground white pepper 
1 Y., cup peanut oil 
l.7 tsp. dark Asian sesame oil 
4 oz. fresh ginger 
3 Tbs. finely chopped cilantro 
Whisk the yolks together with the lime juice, 
salt, and pepper. Slowly incorporate the 
peanut oil and then the sesame oil. 
Peel the ginger and grate it fine using 
either a food processor or the large face of a 
box grater. Squeeze out the ginger's juice 
(you should get about 2 Tbs.) and add it to 
the mayonnaise. Add the cilantro, taste, and 
adjust the seasoning. 
-Molly Stevens, a chef/instructor at the 
New England Culinary Institute, Essex, 
Vermont 
Making Breadcrumbs 
and Croutons 
Every salad deserves a few crunchy croutons. 
Even bread-lovers occasionally find them­
selves with a few slices of bread from the 
bread machine, a quarter of a baguette, or 
a couple of rolls left over at the end of a 
meal. It's a shame to throw away good 
bread, but what can you do with these left­
overs? The easy and smart answer is to 
make breadcrumbs or croutons. 
DRY BREADCRUMBS 
Use your food processor to make dry 
breadcrumbs. Leave the leftover bread in 
an uncovered container until it has com­
pletely dried. (Keeping the bread un­
covered will prevent it from becoming 
moldy and unusable.) Before grinding the 
bread into crumbs, check that it's com­
pletely dry. Bread that's brittle on the out­
side with a soft spot in the center may 
cause the blade of your food processor to 
jam-a good way to burn out the motor. 
Breaking the bread into smaller pieces be­
fore grinding is also a good idea. 
Put the pieces of dried bread into the 
work bowl of the food processor and grind 
it into even crumbs. A steel blade will pro­
duce coarse crumbs, while the grating 
blade will yield fairly fine crumbs. If you 
prefer very fine breadcrumbs, grate the 
bread first and then pass the crumbs 
through a colander. If you don't have a 
food processor, a box grater will work, 
though this method is obviously a bit 
slower. Store your dry crumbs in an air­
tight plastic container or zip-lock bag. 
They should stay fresh up to two weeks. 
Dry breadcrumbs are perfect for rec­
ipes such as casseroles or broiled fish, 
where a crisp, brown crust will seal in 
juices. Adding some chopped herbs or 
grated lemon zest to dry breadcrumbs 
makes a perfect coating for sauteed 
chicken breasts. Dry breadcrumbs, how­
ever, are not for every recipe. 
FRESH BREADCRUMBS 
Fresh breadcrumbs are great for lighter 
coatings and softer crusts, such as the 
classic coating for roasted rack of lamb 
(see p. 44) . These breadcrumbs are sup­
posed to be somewhat moist, so you don't 
have to wait too long for the bread to dry. 
But beware of bread that's too soft-it 
tends to clump into balls instead of sepa­
rating into crumbs. Let the bread become 
slightly stale before loading it into your 
food processor. If the bread has a thick 
crust, remove it before grating so that the 
crumbs stay uniform in size and flavor. Like 
dry crumbs, fresh crumbs are a perfect car­
rier for fresh herbs, citrus zest, and other 
seasonings. Fresh crumbs should be used 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 79 ---
the same day you make them; otherwise, 
they turn into dry breadcrumbs. 
CROUTONS FOR 
SOUPS AND SALADS 
There is no comparison between fresh 
croutons and those that you buy in a box. 
Good, homemade croutons, which are al­
most as easy to make as bread crumbs, can 
add immeasurably to soups and salads. 
Simply cut the bread into cubes or 
rounds (see photo at right); you can also 
stamp out a round using a pastry cutter. 
The size and shape of the crou tons de­
pends on how you plan to use them. Rustic 
cubes are perfect for Caesar salad, while 
small and precise croutons can garnish an 
elegant soup. Three-inch rounds are great 
for heartier soups. Pour the soup on top of 
the crouton, so it softens and thickens the 
soup, or float the toasted round on the 
soup's surface. Just remember to make the 
croutons a uniform size and shape; other­
wise they won't cook evenly. 
Toss or brush the bread with a bit of 
melted butter or olive oil, and season with 
Trade I and Learn 
This could be your most 
memorable vacation. Join 
our smaU, escorted group 
to explore .. 
The Wines and Cuisine 
of Tuscany 
8 nights in a beautifully re­
stored 15th-century farmhouse 
Cordon Bleu cooking classes 
through 
the ScuoIa di
Arie
 
C
uJinaria 
ofF
1nre
nce 
Special lectures on the history 
and tradition of cooking, olive oil, 
and l
taJiLIn
 
wines and 
wine tasting 
Tours and tastings at premier 
estates of the region 
May 18 - 27, 1995 
limited to 12 participants 
For a brochure, please call 
• M.,iner TDurS 
1 -6 1 7-267-6 1 U 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
BASICS 
Croutons for soup. Large, round croutons like these are cut from slices of leftover bread, brushed with 
olive oil, seasoned, and toasted until golden. 
salt and pepper. Sprinkle with chopped 
garlic and herbs if you want more flavor, or 
toss them with some grated Parmesan. 
Spread the cubes on a baking sheet in 
a single layer. Bake in a 350°F oven until 
golden brown, about 15 minutes. Keep an 
eye on them: they burn easily. If you've 
cut larger croutons, you'll probably want 
to give them a flip halfway through bak­
ing so they'll brown on all sides. Use the 
croutons right away, or cool them thor­
oughly and then store them in an airtight 
container for up to three days. 
-Jeffrey Peppet, co-owner of Truffles, 
a gourmet shop in Marblehead, Massa­
chusetts • 
79

--- Page 80 ---
FOOD SCIENCE 
An Inside Look at Hard .. Boiled Eggs 
BY S H I RLEY O. CORRI H ER 
these bonded (or coagulated) 
proteins, and so the egg white 
turns from clear to opaque. 
The bonding proteins trap the 
water in the egg, making it 
moist and tender. If you con­
tinue to heat the egg, or heat it 
too vigorously, the bonds be­
tween the proteins tighten, 
squeezing out the water and 
leaving you with a rubbery egg. 
Green eggs are overcooked. Older eggs are more liable to turn green, but 
The key to making tender 
hard-boiled eggs then is to 
heat them gently just to the 
point where the proteins bond 
firmly but don't squeeze out 
the trapped water. You can do 
this by putting the eggs in boil­
ing water and then turning the 
heat down to a low simmer, 
but there are two drawbacks to 
this method. First, to keep the 
shells from cracking, you have 
to warm refrigerated eggs to at 
least room temperature before 
you put them in the boiling 
water. Otherwise, the cold air 
in the shell expands the instant 
the eggs hit the boiling water, 
cracking open the shells. Sec­
ond, it's all too easy to crack 
won't if their cooking time is carefully monitored. 
Centered yolks look prettier. To move the yolks toward the center of the eggs, 
store them on their side overnight before cooking them. 
B
oiling an egg is easy-about as easy 
as boiling water, right? Wrong. Simple 
as it seems, there's a lot going on inside 
that blank little oval. Depending on the 
age of the egg, how it has been stored, and 
how you cook it, your hard-boiled egg 
can be rubbery, difficult to peel, lopsided, 
and green-yolked, or it can be a thing 
of beauty-a moist, tender white with a 
centered, golden-yellow yolk. 
G ETTI NG THE TEXTURE RIGHT 
When you heat an egg, the coiled proteins 
in both the white and the yolk unwind and 
begin to move around. Almost imme­
diately, the unwound proteins bump into 
each other and bond together. There's no 
longer room for light to travel between 
80 
the shells when lowering the 
eggs into boiling water. If they 
fall even a short distance to the bottom of 
the pan, they may crack. 
A better way is to cover the eggs with at 
least an inch oflukewarm tap water, bring 
the water to a boil, and then remove them 
from the heat. Let large eggs cook gently in 
the hot water for 15 minutes; extra-large 
eggs need 18 minutes. Stop the cooking by 
pouring off the hot water and rinsing the 
eggs with cold running water for 5 min­
utes. With this method, you don't have to 
warm the eggs before cooking them, and 
there's less chance of the shells cracking. 
This is the method that the American Egg 
Board recommends, and I've found that it 
works very well. In fact, egg experts prefer 
the term hard-cooked, since the point of 
this method is to avoid boiling them. 
OLDER EGGS ARE EASIER TO PEEL 
After I've cooled the eggs and poured off 
all the water, I shake the pan vigorously to 
bang the cooked eggs against each other 
and against the sides of the pan, cracking 
the shells all over. Then I rub them under 
running water to peel them. Sometimes 
the shells come right off, but sometimes it's 
really difficult to separate the shells from 
the egg white. Instead of good-looking, 
smooth eggs, I'm left with pitted whites­
fine for egg salad but not for deviled eggs. 
Why does this happen? 
The egg's pH determines how tightly 
the membranes between the egg white and 
the shell are bonded together. The more 
alkaline the egg is, the easier the mem­
branes separate and the easier the egg is to 
peel. When an egg is first laid, it is slightly 
alkaline. As it ages, carbon dioxide seeps 
out through pores in the shell, leaving the 
egg more and more alkaline. Eggs that are 
more than ten days old should peel easily. 
Researchers have verified that it is al­
kalinity alone, and not some other change 
that comes with age, that determines how 
difficult it is to peel an egg. (Yes, there 
really are hard-boiled-egg researchers.) 
They placed difficult-to-peel fresh eggs in 
a sealed container and exposed them to 
fumes from lye, a strong alkali. These eggs, 
when hard-boiled, peeled easily. The re­
searchers then did the reverse and placed 
easy-to-peel older eggs in a sealed con­
tainer and exposed them to hydrochloric 
acid fumes. These acidic eggs would not 
peel easily when hard-boiled. 
G REEN YOLKS COM E WITH AG E 
AND OVERCOOKI NG 
Older eggs are easier to peel, but they're 
more prone to developing a greenish-gray 
layer on the surface of the yolks. This ugly 
discoloration results when sulfur in the 
white combines with iron in the yolk to 
form green iron sulfide. Higher acid levels 
in the egg prevent this reaction. Since 
older eggs are less acidic (more alkaline), 
they're more susceptible to discoloration. 
Heat is the other factor in creating 
greenish yolks. The longer eggs are heated, 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 81 ---
the greater the opportunity for these two 
chemicals to combine. But if you only let 
the eggs stand in hot water for 15 minutes 
and then rinse them in cold water to stop 
the cooking, there shouldn't be any dis­
coloration, even with older eggs. 
If your yolks do have a green coating 
on them, you can repair some of the dam­
age with an acidic sauce. Acids react with 
this green iron sulfide, changing it back to 
a more appealing color. Mixing badly dis­
colored yolks with acidic ingredients, like 
mayonnaise with a little extra lemon juice, 
will greatly reduce the green. 
ECCENTRIC EGG YOLKS 
Deviled eggs or sliced eggs are more ap­
pealing if the yolks are centered and sur­
rounded by an even band of egg white. An 
egg has built-in shock cords that hold the 
yolk safely in the center of the egg. Called 
chalazae, these are the string-like pieces 
that cling to the yolk when you separate 
an egg. They attach the yolk to each end of 
the egg, holding it in place. Fresh eggs have 
strong chalazae, which keep the yolks cen­
tered; however these weaken with age. 
Very fresh eggs with well-centered yolks 
are, however; very difficult to peel. So here 
are two tricks you can use on older eggs to 
better center their yolks. 
The first way to get the yolks towards 
the center of the eggs is to cook the eggs in 
an upright position. You used to be able to 
find wire racks to hold eggs upright in 
cookware specialty shops, but lately I've 
only seen them at tag sales. To get the same 
effect, use a small saucepan that snugly 
holds eight eggs standing on end. To load 
them, prop the pan up at a slant and stack 
the eggs, starting at the lower side, until 
they're all packed in. Cover the eggs with 
water and cook them as described above. 
An easier way is to store the eggs on 
their sides (rather than upright) for a day 
before hard-boiling them. Tape the carton 
closed so that it can't open accidentally 
and stow the carton on its side in the re­
frigerator overnight. Most of the yolks 
migrate back to the center this way. 
PATCH I NG CRACKS 
Every egg has an air pocket in its larger 
end. As the egg ages, it breathes; that is, 
it lets off carbon dioxide and moisture 
through its pores and takes in air. As the 
egg breathes, the air pocket grows. This air 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
pocket expands as the egg is heated and 
can cause the shell to crack. Some people 
recommend piercing a tiny hole in the 
shell to permit the air to escape as the egg 
cooks, but this seems to encourage rather 
than prevent cracking. 
Inevitably some eggs will crack. Adding 
salt to the cooking water will quickly co­
agulate the proteins in the egg to seal the 
crack and keep the egg white from feather­
ing all through the water. A teaspoon of 
salt for up to two dozen eggs is plenty. 
Putting vinegar in the water would also 
speed up coagulation, but the acid will also 
make the eggs more difficult to peel. 
FOOD SCIENCE 
STORI N G HARD-BOI LED EGGS 
After eggs are hard-boiled, they usually 
keep well for up to two weeks in the re­
frigerator. Store them in the shell in their 
carton to prevent them from getting 
banged around and also to protect them 
from refrigerator odors. If a peeled egg 
appears slimy, pink, or has a strong smell, 
discard it immediately. 
Shirley 0. Corriher, of Atlanta, Georgia, 
teaches food science and cooking classes 
around the country. She is a contributing 
editor to Fine Cooking. • 
How fresh are your eggs? 
All cartons coming from a USDA­
inspected plant are stamped with the 
Julian date of when the eggs were 
packed, which is usually within a 
day or two of when they were laid. 
Oulian dates start with 1 on January 
1 and end with 365 on December 
3 1.) Most cartons also have an ex­
piration date, which can be no more 
than 30 days after the pack date. 
Eggs usually don't spoil as they 
age-they dry up instead. Over time, 
moisture and carbon dioxide seep 
out through pores in the shell, leav­
ing behind an air sack that grows in 
size. Temperature and humidity de­
termine how quickly the air pocket 
grows. An egg left uncovered in a 
dry, warm room can change as much 
in one day as an egg properly stored 
in its carton in the refrigerator 
changes a week. A frost-free refrig­
erator dries eggs faster than one that 
isn't frost-free. 
SCIENCE PROJ ECT 
To find out how big an egg's air 
pocket is, place an egg in a clear glass 
bowl of water. If it lies flat on the 
bottom (like the brown egg below), 
it has a relatively small air sack and 
is quite fresh. If the egg stands up on 
the bottom of the bowl (like the 
white one), it has a larger air sack 
and is older. If it bobs off the bottom, 
it's older still. If it floats, watch out. 
81

--- Page 82 ---
PRESENTATIONS 
Here we show off the work of cooks 
who are good at showing off their 
food. The featured cook selects a few 
signature dishes and explains how 
each one is assembled and presented. 
Fanciful 
Finales 
BY DAN BUDD 
Lemon Raspberry Flatbed Tart. 
Several elements go into this 
dessert, each one good on its 
own, but together they make 
a dish that's not just fun to 
look at but is truly delicious 
as well. I never let the look 
of my desserts become the 
most important thing-fla­
vor and freshness are always 
the top priority. But I do like 
to serve desserts that make 
people smile. 
The flatbed of the truck is 
made of shortbread, raspberry 
jam, fresh raspberries, and 
lemon-flavored Swiss meringue. The 
"tanks" on top are piped rows of lemon 
curd that has a lot of body because I've 
cooked it as much as possible without 
ruining the texture, and I've mounted 
it with a lot of butter. The cab of the 
truck is made from a honey-crisp cookie 
shaped by brushing the batter through 
a stencil onto a nonstick baking pan. 
A little chocolate smokestack finishes 
the look. 
82 
Linzertorte. This take on a classic linzer­
torte doesn't depict a particular scene, 
but its lofty structure and pretty colors 
make it a whimsical dessert. The linzer 
cookie is made from a pecan and cinna­
mon dough. Raspberry in three forms­
jam, fresh berries, and sorbet-tops the 
cookie, and a tiny cinnamon shortbread 
ring loops through crisp, airy cigarettes 
of raspberry meringue. Drops of raspberry 
sauce and caramel circle the cookie. 
Opera in the Park. This very "New York" 
dessert has a base of classic gateau 
opera-a French cake made from thin 
layers of almond sponge cake soaked 
with coffee, alternating with chocolate 
and coffee buttercream, and glazed with 
chocolate. The park bench that sits on 
top was made entirely from tempered 
chocolate, by piping the supports, cut­
ting the slats, and "building" it with 
melted tempered chocolate. 
The lamppost has a base of very fudgy 
flourless chocolate cake, with a column 
made from a long chocolate cigarette. 
A white chocolate truffle that's filled 
with white chocolate mousse makes up 
the globe. 
A drizzle of creme anglaise and a 
sprinkle of espresso granules make the 
"bird feed" for the pigeons, which are 
sprayed on with a paint sprayer through 
a stencil using a chocolate and cocoa 
butter paint. 
Dan Budd is the executive pastry chef of 
Park Avenue Cafe, New York City and 
ɴ 
Chicago. • 
ϙ 
FINE COOKING 
§ zE

--- Page 83 ---
The Perfect Gift for Cooks.

T INT ‘Ss
Al TON'S o

COOKIN

FOR PEOPLE WHO LOVE TO COOK

a ame S. $3 Fe Poo }

For anyone who leves to cook, a Fine ( ooking
Gift Subscription makes a wonderful gift—one that
lasts all year long! With each subscription you give, we'll

send a card announcing your thoughtfulness. So take a moment
now to delight your favorite cook with a gift subscription to Fine Cooking,

To order, use the coupon or call 1-800-888-8286 and ask for operator 71.

--- Page 84 ---
REVIEWS 
Bread Machine Cookbooks 
ਲ਼, THE ULTIMATE ,ਲ 
RR£AD MACIIIN[ 
BR 
WA
CHIME 
COOKBOOK 
.I()re Than 1()O Irresistible Foolproof Recipes 1-_ .... 
Tested in .\11 {he /Io,{ Popular .Iodcls 
W
hen bread machines 
were introduced in 
the United States around 
1987, I wrote them off as a 
temporary fad. Eight years 
and several million units 
later, I've had to rethink 
my position. Now that I've 
used a bread machine, I 
understand their appeal. 
Just put in the ingredients, 
press a button, and soon 
the smell of baking bread 
fills the house. A few hours 
later, there's a fresh loaf 
that's ready to eat. 
Bread-machine baking demands pre­
cise measurements. A tablespoon more 
or less liquid can make the difference be­
tween a tender, high-rising loaf and a 
leaden doorstop. Also, bread machines 
vary-not every recipe yields the same 
result in every machine. Instruction 
manuals are invariably limited, offering 
little more than basic directions and a 
84 
BAKI G 
handful of recipes. Consequently, bread 
machine cookbooks have proliferated. 
There are now over thirty such books, all 
published since 199 1 . I've tested recipes 
from many of them. The following three 
books are the ones I like best. 
The Ultimate Bread Machine Cook­
book, by Tom Lacalamita. SIMON & SCHUSfER, 
1993. $25, HAROCOVER; 207 PP. ISBN 0-671-88023-3. 
& Millie Apter 
A former marketing manager for small 
electronics at Welbilt, Tom Lacalamita 
helped develop bread machines for that 
company, and he knows the machines 
very well. The first section of his book, 
titled "Bread Automatically," includes 
4 1 recipes for breads made from begin­
ning to end in the machine. Among 
these are basic loaves, like Rye Bread 
and Cinnamon Raisin Bread, as well as 
more unusual offerings, like crunchy 
Golden Cracked-Wheat Bread and a 
cozy Honey Graham Granola Bread. 
The second part of the book, "Hand­
Shaped Delights," contains recipes for 
doughs that are made in the machine, 
and then shaped by hand and baked 
in a conventional oven. Brioche, Egg 
Bagels, and Fresh Herb Focaccia are 
some of the 62 breads in this section. 
The recipes are appealing both for 
their creativity and their simplicity. Few 
call for hard-to-find ingredients. La­
calamita's recipes were tested on ten 
different models, so they work on many 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 85 ---
types of machines, but I find his recipe 
format confusing and difficult to use. 
With ingredients listed in the center of 
the page and measurements for differ­
ent size loaves to the left and right of 
the ingredient list, it's too easy to mix 
up the sets of measurements. Nutri­
tional information is included with 
each recipe, and there are 32 pages of 
color photographs. 
Bread Machine Baking-Perfect Every 
Time, by Lora Brody & Millie Apter. WILLIAM 
MORROW, 1 993. $20, SPIRAL-BOUND HARDCOVER; 342 PP. 
ISBN 0-688-1 1843-7. 
Like most bread-machine users, Lora 
Brody and her mother, Millie Apter, 
quickly discovered that not every rec­
ipe works with every machine. So for 
their book, they wrote each recipe in 
several different versions, each version 
tailored for a specific machine, includ­
ing OAK, Panasonic/National (large and 
small) , Hitachi, Sanyo, Maxim, Welbilt 
(large and small) , Regal, and Zojirushi. 
The ingredients for each version are 
listed in the order suited to that partic­
ular machine, eliminating the need to 
refer to the machine's manual. As a re­
sult, this bread-machine cookbook is 
the easiest one to use that I've found. 
The book is organized by bread type: 
white, whole wheat, sourdough, vege­
table and herb, cheese, fruit, and sweet. 
Of the 75 recipes, some 18 are for hand­
shaped bread, such as Pizza Dough, an 
excellent rendition made flavorful with 
olive oil, cornmeal, and whole-wheat 
flour. While Brody and Apter provide 
plenty of traditional recipes (Basic 
Whole Wheat and Russian Black Bread, 
for instance) , the bulk of the recipes are 
creative and even whimsical. Brody and 
Apter obviously had fun creating these 
recipes. Avery-Island Hot Bread is a 
bright-orange loaf spiked with Tabasco 
and pepper-flavored vodka. The unusual 
Sweet-Potato Rye Bread is flavored with 
lemon, orange, cinnamon; and black 
pepper. Some recipes are rather elabo­
rate, like the multi-stepped Caramelized 
Onion Braid, but the authors' instruc­
tions are very clear and easy to follow. 
APRIL!MA Y 1995 
Unfortunately, finding the individ­
ual recipes isn't so easy. Since there are 
so many versions of each, a single recipe 
can go on for several pages. A list in the 
table of contents would make locating 
favorites less difficult. 
Electric Bread, by the staff of Innovative 
Cooking Enterprises & Susan Nightingale. 
INNOVATIVE COOKING ENTERPRISES, 1 993. $29.95, SPIRAL­
BOUND HARDCOVER; 158 PP. ISBN 0-962983 1 -3-6. (SOFT­
COVER, $19.95.) 
Innovative Cooking Enterprises (ICE) 
has established itself as the ultimate 
bread-machine tester. First published in 
1 99 1 , its book, Electric Bread, is up­
dated annually and provides a good 
cross-section of simple and elaborate 
bread recipes. The company tests all 
the recipes on most of the machines on 
the market-its test kitchen now has 
80 machines and claims to have baked 
more than 1 0,000 loaves. The staff also 
tests recipes using a variety of flours 
and yeasts. 
I tried recipes from this book on sev­
eral machines. The delicious Certainly 
Citrus made with marmalade, lemon, 
and lime juice, was successful in each 
machine, but hardly identical. Some 
machines produced a light, airy loaf, 
while others turned out a denser loaf 
REVIEWS 
with a finer crumb. Similarly, the recipe 
for Easy French Bread yielded loaves of 
varying heights in different machines. 
There are 5 1 recipes, some of which 
are quite creative. The Sweet Coconut 
Curry bread is so simple and unusual 
that it's worth buying a bread machine 
j ust to have such a delicious bread 
on hand all the time. There are also 
recipes for eight "specialty" breads­
meaning those that are baked in an 
oven-including Calzones. The Honey 
Bran English Muffins were fine, but the 
texture is more like a roll than an Eng­
lish muffin. Buttery, pull-apart Orange 
Kisses are delectable. There is also a 
section of recipes for bread spreads, 
such as Green Peppercorn Butter and 
Gruyere Apple Spread. 
This eye-catching book has color 
photographs on every spread. Each rec­
ipe is accompanied by "Success Hints," 
but aside from a list of ingredients and 
measurements, no instructions are in­
cluded-you're meant to follow the in­
structions that come with your machine. 
Electric Bread also includes a catalog of 
accessories that ICE carries-yes, adver­
tisements in your cookbook. 
-Lise Stem is the editor of"The Cook­
book Review, " a bimonthly newsletter pub­
lished in Cambridge, Massachusetts. • 
OTH ER BREAD-MAC H I N E BOOKS OF I NTEREST: 
Best Bread-Machine Cookbook 
Ever, by Madge Rosenberg. Harper­
Collins, 1992. $ 15.95, spiral-bound; 
224 pp. ISBN 0-06-016927-3. 
Bread Machine Baking for Better 
Health, by Maureen B. Keane & 
Daniella Chace. Prima, 1994. 
$12.95, softcover; 236 pp. 
ISBN 1-55958-419-X. 
Desserts from your Bread Machine, 
by Lora Brody. William Morrow, 
1994. $22, hardcover; 290 pp. 
ISBN 0-688-1307 1-2. 
Bread Machine Cookbook, Book 
Five, by Donna Rathmell German. 
Bristol Publishing Enterprises, 
1994. $8.95, softcover; 1 72 pp. 
ISBN 1-558-67093-9. 
Bread Machine Magic Book of 
Helpful Hints, by Linda Rehberg & 
Lois Conway. St. Martin's Press, 
1993. $10.95, softcover; 224 pp. 
ISBN 0-3 12-06914-6. 
85

--- Page 86 ---
FLAVORINGS 
Dill 
M
ost herbs are "either/or"-either 
their seeds are used as a seasoning, 
or their leaves are. Dill is unusual in that 
both its seeds and its leaves can be used in 
cooking. The seeds lend a strong, tangy 
flavor to pickles, soups, and specialty 
breads, while the leaves (also used in 
pickling) contribute a pleasant savor to 
sauces, salads, potatoes, and fish. 
Certainly dill's most familiar asso­
ciation is with pickles, usually cucumber 
86 
ANETHUM 
GRAVEOLENS 
pickles. When I make pickles, 
I use not only dill seed, but 
also dill vinegar, which is easy to 
make at home. Just pick enough 
fresh dill leaves and tender side stalks 
to loosely fill a one-quart jar. Rinse and 
pat them dry. Stuff the dill into the jar 
and cover with vinegar. (Use cider vinegar 
if you'll be pickling green beans or cucum­
bers, but if you plan to pickle cauliflower, 
use a clear vinegar so as not to darken the 
white florets.) Cover the jar loosely and 
set it in a sunny spot for a week or so, shak­
ing it daily. Strain the vinegar into a clean 
bottle and seal it. 
Fresh dill weed is also used to make 
gravlax, a Scandinavian delicacy of sal­
mon cured with dill, cracked pepper, 
sugar, and salt. When grilling salmon, I 
often wrap the fillets in aluminum foil 
with a few sprigs of dill and a little butter. 
The fish is delectable, and if the packets 
are opened carefully, there's a spoonful 
or so of sauce to go with a side dish of 
steamed rice or boiled new potatoes. Try 
a thin white sauce flavored with dill as a 
delicious alternative to mint sauce for 
lamb. Keep in mind that heat diminishes 
dill's flavor, so add it to hot dishes just 
before serving. 
FROM GARDEN TO TABLE 
SO companionable an herb belongs in 
every kitchen-and in every kitchen gar­
den. Although it transplants poorly, dill 
is easily raised from seed scattered where 
you want the plants to grow. In the spring, 
just loosen the soil in a sunny spot, sow 
the seed, and cover lightly. Germination 
occurs within a week, and you can begin 
using snippets and thinnings soon after. 
Plants mature in about six weeks and can 
grow as tall as three feet. Make several 
sowings, at about two-week intervals, to 
ensure a constant supply of tender, tasty 
leaves. Once the plants begin to blossom, 
their leaves yellow with age and are less 
flavorful. Allow some plants to mature in 
order to harvest the seed. Some ripe seeds 
will fall to the ground, to volunteer as self­
sown seedlings. 
Dill's fresh flavor fades when dried; 
freezing is a better way to preserve its 
taste. Rinse the leaves, pat dry, divide into 
recipe-sized units, seal in plastic wrap, 
and freeze until needed. For easy re­
trieval, staple several packets to a sheet 
of cardboard and label it. This simplifies 
their recovery; otherwise, individual 
packets tend to skitter to the freezer's 
nether recesses and disappear. 
Where space doesn't permit the culti­
vation of the fresh herb, you can purchase 
it. Young plants with their roots washed 
free of soil are commonly found in the 
produce section of most supermarkets. 
Stand them upright in a jar of water and 
the leaves will remain fresh for a consider­
able period. Fortunate is the cook who 
has dill seed in the cupboard and dill 
weed in the garden. 
Judy Glattstein, a landscape consultant in 
Wilton, Connecticut, teaches classes on 
herbs for both garden and kitchen use. • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 87 ---
T H E 
Y
O
U
 N G 
C H E F S 
D 
N U 
M B E R 
F I 
V E 
I N 
A 
S E R I E S. 
"Butter Adds A Burst Of Flavor To Almost Everything!' 
Chef George Morrone, Aqua, San Francisco 
"That's why I use it here and at home. 
Citrus and mint flavored butter turns 
grilled swordfish into something incredibly 
delicious. Here's what I do. I simply blend 
grated lemon and orange peel with mint 
and softened butter. I put a pat or two on 
the swordfish to baste it and keep it moist. 
Delicious! 
Try it yourself. You'll enjoy your own 
. 
" 
sauce creatlon. 
NOTHING BRINGS OUT THE TASTE LIKE 
B U T T E R 
Amenca's Dairy Farmers t:) © National DairY Board 1994

--- Page 88 ---
CALENDAR 
Sponsoring an event that you want readers to know 
about? Send an announc
emen
t to Calendar, Fine 
Cooking, PO Box 5506, New
town
, CT 06470· 
5506. Be sure to include dates, a complete address, 
and the phone number to call for more inf
onna
tion. 
Listings are free, but restricted to events of direct 
interest to cooks. We go to press three months before 
the issue date of the magazine and must be notified 
well in advance. The deadline for entries in the 
August/Sep
tember 
issue is May 1. 
ARIZONA 
Cooking Contest-Hava·Salsa Challenge, April 
28-29, Windsor State Park Beach, Lake Havasu City. 
Salsa.mixing contest. Call Jay Lewis at 6021453.3641 . 
CALIFORNIA 
Festival
---4
9th Annual Sebastopol Apple Blossom 
Festival & Sebastopol Music Festival, April 29-30, 
Ives Park, Sebastopol. Call 707/823·3032. 
Festival-Oxnard Strawberry Festival, May 20--2 1 , 
College Park, Oxnard. Call 805/385· 7578. 
Festival-Mushroom Mardi Gras, May 27-28, Mor· 
gan Hill. Festival celebrating mushroom varieties grown 
in South Santa Clara County. Call 408n79·9444. 
COLORADO 
Triathlon-2nd Annual Chef's Team Triathlon, April 
8-10, The Village, Breckenridge. Chef teams compete 
in a slalom ski race and create foods in "The Image of 
the Old West." Call Michel Bouit at 3 1 21663·5701. 
Festival-The Aspen Food & Wine Magazine Clas· 
sic,June 1 6--18, Aspen. Call 800/494·6395. 
CONNECTICUT 
Festival---4 1st Windsor Shad Derby, May 20, Town 
Green, Windsor. For information, call 203/688·5 165. 
COOK'S MARKET 
EARTHSTONE 
WOOD-FIRE O
VEN
S 
THE ULTIMATE GOURMET APPLIANCE 
213-656-5926 
237 S. La Brea Ave .. Los Angeles CA 90036 
Taste the Southwest! 
Gourmet chjle peppers: Roasted & IndividuaUy Quick­
Frozen (IQF). We also have Organic Dry Red Chiles. 
AU grower-direct to you! Shipped UPS nationwide. 
....... CHILE LA (;LA 
'-
Chile La Isla. P.O. Box 1 379, Fabens, Texas 79838 
(800) 895-4603 
Georgia Pecans I Peanuts 
NEW CROP / SHELLED / IN SHELL 
Gifts / FREE BROCHURE / Cooking 
SUN BURST FARMS 
Dept. L, 352 Paul Sumner Rd., Omega, GA 31775 
TOLL FREE 1-800-358-9412 
88 
FLORIDA 
Festival-5th Annual Florida Winefest & Auction, 
April 20--23, Sarasota. Vintners and celebrity chefs 
collaborate on a series of brunches, dinners, wine tast· 
ings, seminars, and a wine auction. Call 8131952.1 109. 
GEORGIA 
Festival & Cooking Contest-Miller Genuine Draft 
Hot & Spicy Food Festival, May 20, Naval Air Sta· 
tion, Marietta. Cooking competition categories in· 
clude: Mexican, Cajun, hot American, Caribbean, 
Italian, and international cuisine. Call 404/872·4 73 1 . 
LOUISIANA 
Festival-The Breaux Bridge Crawfish Festival, 
May 5-7. Call 3 18/332·6655. 
MASSACHUSETTS 
Festival-Boston Brewers Festival, May 13, World 
Trade Center. Public tasting of a wide variety of 
micro, specialty, and limited· release beers from Cana· 
dian and American brewers. For information, call 
617/547 ·631 1 . To order tickets, call 617193 1 .2000. 
MICHIGAN 
Festival-The 
ational Morel Mushroom Festival, 
May 18-2 1 , Sunset Park, Boyne City. Foraging for 
wild edibles, National Morel Mushroom Hunting 
Championship, other events. Call 6 1 6/582.6222. 
MISSISSIPPI 
Festival-World Catfish Festival, April I, Belzoni. 
For information, call 800/408·4838. 
PENNSYLVANIA 
Antiques Show-'The Cook's Fancies," 34th An· 
nual Philadelphia Antiques Show, April 8-12. An· 
tique cooking tools displayed include elaborate molds 
in copper, ceramics, and wood; unusual cooking 
WARM YOUR MOTHER'S HEART 
With a Coffee of the Month 
Gift Membership. Each month 
she'll receive a new, beautifully 
packaged, gourmet selection. 
Call 1 800 242-2226 for info. 
She'll thank you from the 
bottom of her cup! 
d-. 
& 
GROUNDS 
91!' 
CATERIN
GS
EASO
NING 
g A Zesty Rub for Meat, Fish, 
and Poultry. 
Gives Your Barbecue Personality! 
Trial size plus proven barbecue recipes. Send 
$4.95 to G.B.G., Box 1 522, Ridgecrest, CA 93556 
BUY OVER 40 GOURMET 
DESSERT MIXES FACTORY DIRECT 
O1J\MPStr 
Italian Dessert lovers Special 
5 bags Tiramisu Mix, 5 doz. Italian imported ladyfingers, 
Plus Espresso Coffee. All for only $19.95 + s/h 
: , . :.I . • 
III 
. 
Swissco Foods 1200 Arizona B-13' Redlands, CA 92374 
਱,-______ 


e
wt
o
48s
m
re
s !
 or!o"m#
r$
%&.5'O(
. ______ 
ਯਰ 
utensils; paintings with culinary themes; rare cook· 
books; food sculptures; and more. Call 2 15/387 ·3500. 
Festival-Rhubarb Festival, May 20, Kitchen Kettle 
Village, Intercourse. Rhubarb cooking contest, other 
events. Call 8001732·3538. 
SOUTH CAROLINA 
Festival-1 5th Annual Crawfish Festival, April 29, 
Pawleys Island. Call 803/237·3301. 
TENNESSEE 
Festival
---4
2nd Annual Cosby Ramp Festival, May 7, 
Kineaubista Hill, Cosby. Festival celebrating the ramp 
(a cross between onion and garlic). Includes a breakfast, 
an afternoon barbecue, music, and other events. Call 
Richard Stein at 6 15/487·2705. 
Festival-10th Annual River Roast, May 1 9-20, 
Ross's Landing, Chattanooga. Barbecue cook· off com· 
petition, music, river activities. Call 6 15!265·4397. 
TEXAS 
Conference--Annual Conference of the International 
Association of Culinary Professionals, April 5-9, Mar· 
riott River Center, San Antonio. Call Lynnette Ritter at 
5021581·9786. 
VERMONT 
Festival-Vermont Maple Festival, April 2 1-23, St. 
Albans. Celebrations and exhibits centering on the 
maple industry. Call 8021899·5410. 
VIRGINIA 
Festival-27th Annual Eastern Shore Seafood Festi· 
val, May 3, Tom's Cove Campground, Chincoteague 
Island. Call 8041787·2460. 
"NAME YOUR GAME" EXOTIC FRESH MEATS 
""Bison, Boar, Emu, Venison, Elk, Antelope, 
Kangaroo, Wild Turkey, Quail, Goose, 
Pheasant, Alligator, Ostrich and much more. 
Foie Gras, Russian Cal(iar, French Pate, 
European style meats 
For Catalog 1 -919-972-7423 
International Home Cooking 
305 Mallory St, Rocky Mounਸ਼ NC 27601 
G&R 
Publishing Co. 
Dept. Fe 
507 Industrial St. 
Waverly, IA 50677 
• 
Order as few as 
100 Books 
• 
Low prices 
• 
Many FREE features 
• 
Helpful & friendly customer 
51. Mary's 
Family Favorites 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 89 ---
• VIKING 
• BOSCH 
• GARLAND 
• BEST HOODS 
• SUB-ZERO· 
• 
• OTHERS 
Western Stales only. 
Call for a quote. please have model numbers ready 
1 -800-21 3-7747 
C-N-D MARKETING 
ALMONDS 
Natural - Wholesome - Fresh Shelled 
Direct From Our Ranch To You! 
Special - $16.50 
2-one pound tubs Natural Almond Butter 
and 
2-one pound pkgs Natural Whole Almonds 
5 lbs. Shelled-Whole Almonds - $1 6.50 
25 Ibs. Shelled-Whole Almonds - $69.50 
Prices include shipping cost in U.S.A. 
4 - 1 lb. pkg. Variety 
Flavored Almonds - $1 6.50 
Send Check or Money Order to: 
WATERFORD NUT COMPANY 
P.o. BOX 37 Waterford, CA 95386 
209-874-2317 ِ>S
SSْ 
THE ORIGINAL
D:l;I3Dί 
ɳ
tem Sfiore 
GrabcaJ@s 
An elegant & easy dining solution. Our 
crabcakes started it all. Made by hand 
using the rmest Chesapeake Bay 
Crabmeat. All you do is heat & serve. 
Enjoy an Eastern Shore Tradition! 
• 
Fresh, shucked Oysters 
• 
Soft-shell Crabs . Shad & Shad Roe 
• Gift Packages & Certificates 
• 
Cookbooks · Aged Virginia Hams 
Please send me your free brochure 
م
*
"Expr@ss
Ud. 
Route I, Box 38 . Centerville, MD • 21617 
800-282-CRAB 
qϗ SHOPPE 
... We offer one of the most extensive selections 
of traditional British foods 
& cheeses in the U.S . 
... Phone 1-!lQO.8GB.NOSH or Fax your order to 
us, & it will'b e on it's way to you vja UPS. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Phloyds line up includes: ' 
Bar·S-Oue Sauce. Marinade, 
Dry Rub, Italian Mustard, 
Pepper Mustard and Pizza 
Dust. Phamous Phloyds 
phoods are sure to 
become your phavoritesl 
Personalized Bitt 
packs for al/ occasIons! 
Phamous Phloydن 
(303)757-3285 
(800)497-3281 
2998 South Steele St , Denver, CO 802 1 0 
DIscoVER TIIE IARGFSf 
SELECTION OF 
DRIED BFANS, PFAS 
& 
LENTllS 
IN TIIE U.S. 
Delicous Bean Flour Mixes 
Un
usual 
Spices & 
Seasonings 
Bean, Grain 
& Rice Cookbooks 
Sample 
Packs 
'That Make Great Gifts 
Specialty Rices, Rice Blends and Ancient Grains 
We Offer More 
Than 
90 Types of Legumes, 40 Organic 
&a.eAل! 
For a free catalogue write to 8ean 8ag Mail Order Company 
818 JeffelSon 51. Oakland, CA 94507 or call 510·839-8988 
SPICES - TEAS -
COFFEES - SPECIALTY ITEMS 
FREE 70 PAGE 
CATALOG 
1 800 228-4276 
(313) 259-6373 
2521 RUSSELL STREET 
DETROIT, MICHIGAN 48207 
GREAT COFFEE GIFTS 
Mugs, Grinders, Biscotti in a High Gloss Gift Box, 
Perfect for all gift occasions, 
Call for a free catalog or to order 1-800-755-9497 
or Fax 206-92s{)1B8 
Cocoa Beach Coffee Company 
.ĝĞ;t: . PHILLIP& · .Ϙ6:1Ĝ 
EXOTIC MUSHROOMS & ACCESSORIES 
ORDER FRESH EXOTIC MUSHROOMSI 
Portobello, Crimini, Shiitoke & Oyster 
FOR YOUR FREE CATALOG & GREAT GIFT IDEAS 
CAlL - 1 -800-AH-FUNGI 
I I 
COOK'S MARKET 
STO
NEH
ILL FARM 
The Naturaly No-Fat 
Food Company 
• HONEY GINGER PEAR 
P",il.Pul/ Spread 
• TOMATO TANGO 
"0 savory tomato butter 
infused with lemon e-spices" 
FREE CATALOG & RECIPES • FOOD GIfTS 
1-800-776-7155 Box 158 ' SchwenksvilC, PA 19473 
Southwestern Sl2.ecialties 
Recipes an computer disk for Windows"" 
i10 
T] 
Resort and Spa Chefs of the southwest 
II share their recipes: appetizers, entrees, 
award wlnnln, desserts, .• 
Includes 
sources for southwestern specialty 
foods. 
i I FREE BONUS SOnwARE: leta you add 
your own 
recipes and meous. 
Send $19.95 + 3.95 S&H to : 'Menu Master'''' 
P.O. Box 14904, Scottsdale, AZ 85267 
For fiJI/ list of recipe packages send SASE or fax 602 493-3346 
.
Ϩ
. 
THE VICTORIAN 
eEl L I N G RA C K 
Imported from 
[ngland 
This pine and cast iron rack is the perfecl way 10 display pots 
and pans, dried herbs and flowers, and favourne kitchen 
utensils. Each kit contains 4 hand finished slats · available in 
4ft, 5ft & 6ft lenglhs • 
2 cast iron ends, 2 ceiling hooks and 
height adiustable links. The VICTORIAN CLOTHES DRYER is 
also available. Castings available in black, green, red & blue. 
For Information or to order: 
MastercardNisa, Free Brochure t -800-220-0633 
== __ 
._ .. Earn a two·year degree in Culinary 
Arts under the guidance of professional chefs, 
!::-!:i r 
ਭ Devclop yOLlI' talcnt using modcl'll 
• : facilities and equipment at four locations: 
-_ 
Atlanta, Fort Landerdale, Houston & Denrer, 
• -
... .., The School of Culinary Artsਮ 
_ 
A OIVIIIOI OF THE ART IIITITUlE OF AmllA,THE ARI 
rmmnIlfAlll
WllllAl, 
l1IEARl
IlSTlllflE
IfI/lllTll&llI
C1lllAOINSlllflI
IfART 
1-800-543-4860 
o THE ART INSTITUTES INTERNATIONAl-, INC • 
1884 SC80 
89

--- Page 90 ---
COOK'S MARKET 
Imported European Chocolate 
Pure Gennan 
ChocokrIe 
at 
Wholesa
le Prices 
<moo of 
seniswre
t
k
, wtlte
k
,
 dcJI< tiJck. m1< tiJck. wtlte block or 
sweet 110000 chocolate. $3.50 
S/H per stOpment, FREE RECtPES. 
5 Y, lb. 24.75 
11 lb. 43.50 
ě
' ك 
Check/MO
:
 
JOSEY B. (U.S.A.) CORP. 
• POBox28ϔ'϶fN1jϧ5159$44 
IT!>orIed cirfi!jlt ocr;;c cais
ters 
CMJiobIe
.
 
A TOUCH OF PEPPER 
Touch Sensor Activated Electronic PPTmprmill 
"Maitre Queux" 
• 
Infinite selection of 
grind sizes 
• 
Rechargeable nickel 
cadmium batteries 
• 
Black/while wi 
stainless steel /rim. 
9 Y2" X 2 %" 
$99.00+ S&H 
Mr. Pepper 
J-800-837-DASH 
Fresh Ducklings 
• 
Boneless Breasts 
Plain , Teriyaki 
Honey Orange 
Delivered to your door by 
Fed Ex. 10 lb. Min. Order 
Delicious Griled! 
1-800-825-9225 
Fax: 1-219-825-2613 
Culver Duck F
arms, Inc. 
p.o. Box 910, Middlebury, IN 46540 
GOURMET SALSA 
The Ultimate Southwestern Taste 
You haven't tasted salsa until you've tried this 
unique blend of authentic southwest favors! 
Available in sweet, mild, medium, hot varieties. 
Perfect for snacks & cooking - makes a great gift. 
Pow Wow Pak - 3 different salsas $16.99 
Kachina Pak - 5 different varieties $26.99 
FREE BROCHURE 
Delicious free recipes included with order. 
Visa, M/C. Amex. Check. MlO, + Shipping & Handling 
Mill GOURMET FOODS 
1-800-374-7823 
r - - - - - - - - - - - -
I Leɯrɮɭ
rɬe£!1mĚĤ!ĥ dęeĘėĦfurt, 
-
I desserts and much more. Plus. great gourmet reci­
pes! Learn the secrets and techniques of food 
I preparation and serving. Diploma awarded. FREE 
I 
BROCHURE describes opportunities. No salesmen. 
Write or call todayl 1-800-326-9221 
90 
l);scover 
.. 
small·batch 
I 
roasted quality. 
.. 
We use only the finest 
.., 
arabica beans 
.-. 
from around the = 
wod, and roast 
'-' 
and ship daily. 
I 
Free shipping is 
.... 
provided when you 
register as an Armeno = 
llll)IIɲNO 
Express customer and ق 
order 2 Ibs. or more ot 
.... 
coffee each month. 
-
(ϕOIūIūlm 
Χ .... 
Call today 
ɰ 
11Ol,srl'IϖIlS for your FREE 
ਫ 
catalog. 
ਪ 
1:1'1) 
I 
1·800·ARMENO·1 
.. 
(1-800-276·3661 ) 
T
ALAMAN
CA BLACK 
PEPPERCORNS 
Organically grown on family farms in the tropical rain forests of 
Costa Rica, Talamanca wGrowers Reserve" Whole Black 
Peppercorns are now available direct to you from the importer. 
Experience for yourself the unique aroma, the spiciness, the 
difference that freshly picked by hand, sun dried peppercorns 
make. Order Talamanca MGrower's Reserve" peppercorns 
today. MAKES A GREAT GIFT! 
INTRODUCTORY OFFER: 
4 oz. Pkg - $6.75 plus $3.50 S/H 
1·"Peppermate" peppermill (rated best in Cooks Magazine), 
with a 4 oz. Pkg ot Pepper, $40.00 + 
$4.50 sIh 
Other gift packages available. 
Quantity price quotes and commercial inquiries welcome. 
Please call or write: BRUGGER BROTHERS 
3868 NE 1 69TH ST., #401 
N. MIAMI BEACH, FL 33160 
(800) 949-2264 
Only The Very Best 
For Today's Creative Cook 
For over 125 years WATKINS has set the stan­
dard for the finest quality peppers, vanilla, cin­
namon, spices, mustards, sauces, and soup bases. 
FREE CATALOG (w/recipes) 
Write: K. Humphreys, Watkins Indep. Rep. 
1060 Tara Way, Lawrenceburg, KY 40342 
(fi/ckm 
; Ch
icken
 
ɱ/<;;;J : 
Expr
essions 
it'. 1 byN
ortna
ndJ.
Leclai
r 
. 
. 
! A few basic steps are 
, used to create 50 
Φ 
..
' chicken entrees. They 
਩ ਬ 
, are convenient enough 
to make weeknights 
for family, elegant enough to serve to 
guests. $11.00 PPD. Also available 
Seafood Expressions, $13.50 PPD. 
Normand J. Leclair 
Chicken Expressions 
Box 356, No. Kingstown, RI 02852 
.: . 
. Aged over 3 yrs. 7.99 lb. 
Extra Virgin First Cold Presed Olive Oil 
4.99 ilter 12.49 gal. 
.:. 
Porcini Mushrooms· 
lUX) Y4 lb., 20.00 Y2 1b. 
Other Gourmet SpeCialty Items Available 
To order or for information and free brochure 
Teitel Brothers 1-800-850-7055 Prices Plus SIH 
LOOKING FORA 
COOKING SCHOOL? 
New Seventh Edition · 338 Pages 
You'll find it in tbis 
comprehensive resource 
to over 800 career and 
vacation programs 
worldwltk. 
Recom
mmuled 
by 
Bon """,tit, Gounnet, 
The New York TImes 
JUS1 $22.95 ppd. 
Shawfiuides 
Box 1295, NY, NY 10023 
Credit cards call: 
(800) 247·655Ψ or 
Fax (419) 281-6883 
THE KNIFE 
YOU'LL REACH FOR 
CERAMIC ZIRCONIA BLADE 
MAKES CUTTING SILKY SMOOTH 
• 
Diamond-hard white Kyocera blade · Sharper 
than any steel edge · Lightweight and perfectly 
balanced · Stays razor sharp - never needs 
sharpening · One-year factory warranty 
• 
The ideal gift for the serious cook · 
5" All-Purpose Slicer $59و + $5 shp. 
Order now from: ShawGuides 
Box 1 295. New York NY 1 0023 
Credit cards: (800) 247·6553 or Fax (419) 281 ·6883 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 91 ---
'(I;;Oria 's 
prnegars 
Ros!:1 Meletftge 
MocteYLet Betlsetmic 
Betl1!:1 Dill Lemoft 
Freftch Tetrretgoft 
RO!:1etl RCtSpl1err!:1 
Lemoft!:1 Pepper Th!:1 me 
16. 75 oz. 
$12.00 
cpo (]3oـ 127, PreefioUf, :NY 12431 
(800) 646-2059 
CULINARY 
INSTITUTE 
wemRN CUliNARY INsn
lUT
E
 
I l l 6 SW I lth Avenue 
Portland, OR 9nOI 
(SOl) 22l·2245 or (800) 666bl I 2 
Professional chef training and culinary art pro· 
gram Intensive I 2·month program based on the 
principals of Escoflier with emphasis on modem 
techniques. Financial aid available for those who 
qualify. and VA approved. 
Call or write today (or more information 
and catalog. 
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR 
CULINARY SKillS NOW! 
DI
RECTOR
Y 
NOiLOWFAT 
HEALllty 
GOlRIIET 
COOKBOOK
S 
Announcing incredible NEW 
NATIONAL DIRECTORY OF 
NO FAT/lOW FAT, SUPER 
HEALTHY GOURMET COOK­
B O O K S . Powerful c o m p­
rehensive detailed resource. 
Fa ntastic variety, u n i q u e 
selections from gourmet vegetarian to spa 
cuisine. Hundreds detailed. Improve your 
cooki n g , 
h e a lth , 
c o m p etitive 
e d g e . 
Indispensable resource for cooks, chefs, and 
health conscious. 
ORDER NOW. $24.95 Plus 3.00 S & H 
To: INFO EDGE PUBLICATIONS 
15 East Putnam Ave. , 360FC 
Greenwich, CT 06830 
or Call 1 -800-525-7 1 1 0 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
Expose yourseflo exotic spices, herbs • 
mouth-watering herb bleed mixesl 
Sav
ory 
sauce mixes w8h no-lal . no· sal. Naturallv, 
1h& 
n.aIl.uI 
ਦ/'I\.C1 has nothing 10 hide. 
Cali lor your Iree catalog. 
1-800-873-1860 
cP -?- [all 
ɩ I'" 
(J3:i\ 
".l,-rt;,ਨ 
Ò 7'"ϒϓ HI> 
ؽ ਧ .l' MINOI(S. Ė 
FRESH, NATURAL FLAVOR 
The leader in umeat-first" bases adds delicious 
flavor to aU your poultry, seafood, vegetable & 
meal dishes . . . Slocks, Sauces, Soups, Gravies. 
Entrees and more!! 
Free recipes with order. 
:(S'. ϵ\-IO MINOD'CS. An award ":inning 
\'1> 
l'\:i Amencan Food 
Products Com parry 
Low sodium & I 
No-Added MSG 
Us.d iII.J-,est __ ts 
Varieties Available 
UC< 1951 
CALL ALLSERV 
1-800-827-8328 
OLD C OUNTRY R E C IPE 
Truly the BEST SAUCE EVER!! 
#MY 
great grandmother's pasta 
_-
sauce easy to make and tastes 
' t:-' 
. 
GREAT. Send S.A.S.E. + $3.00 to 
• - .I Mama Nelcionii PO. Box 60158 
Colorado Springs, Co. 80960 
We're setting the dairy industry back 100 years 
Egg Farm Dairy ,,\lu fARM DAIRy 
Cultured Sweet Butter( F D 
Clabbered Cream 
Wild Ripened Cheeses 
Gift Boxes 
- Now available by mail -
Call or write for our mail order brochure 
Egg Farm Dairy 
2 John Walsh Blvd. - Peekskill, NY 10566 
1-800-CREAMERY 
MOUNT HOREB MUSTARD MUSEUM: 
Americas' most entertaining and literary food catalog 
is from the Mount Horeb Mustard Museum. Choose 
from more than 400 distinctive mustards, gift boxes, 
clothing, books, pennants ("POUPON U-America's 
Mustard College'), a Mustard-of·the-Month Club, and 
everything imaginable for the mustard lover. Call 
1-800·GET·MU ST (1·800·438·6878) for a FREE 
CATALOG 
COOK'S MARKET 
ؼ
- - - - - -ف 
I S 5 0 Iؾ Iؿ mnJlunrl' (:: 0 Iɀ Iɀ IɁ IɁ I 
I CALL FOR YOUR Don Francisco Coffee I 
Traders catalog and get $5 off your ftrst 
I order. Choose from over 60 varieties of I 
coffees from the world's richest coffee 
I 
grOWIng regIons - I 
plus gifts and acces-
I 
sories. All specially I 
selected by Don 
I 
Francisco's, a 
I 
family company 
I 
born on their I 
own coffee 
I 
plantation. 
I 
I FIN504 
1(1100)697-52112 I 
ػ------.... 
GOURMET 
MUSHROOMS 
Freshly harvested 
Morels, Chanterelies, 
Cepes and many 
other varieties, 
Dried mushrooms 
and a large selection 
of specialty foods 
also available. 
To order or for brochure call: 
1 -(800)-569-61 01 
Visa and Mastercard accepted. 
The Chef's Collection: Professional Cutlery, 
Cookware and Gourmet Accessories at 
Discounted Prices. All-Clad, Scanpan, Bourgeat 
And More! Free Catalog!! 
1 -800-590-CHEF (2433) 
1-800-432-CRAB " 
cbesap 
"Chesapeake Bay Country's" finest seafood: 
gourmet crab cakes, crab imperial, crab quiche, 
crab soup and other handmade seafood products. 
Write or place your order by phone. 
Chesapeake Bay Gourmet 
P.O. Box 456 
VISA and MC 
Chesler, MD 21619 
FREE BROCHURE 
rtɪɫ
ɨ 
• 
Gourmet Vinegars - 13 varieties 
• 
Gourmet Mustards - 7 varieties 
• 
Salsas · Herb Blends · Tart Cherry Rice Pilaf 
Our own reCipes, made with herbs we grow! 
Perfect for lo·cal or 10' fat diets. 
Call or write for FREE CATALOG 
4603 Berkshire ' Detroit, MI 48224 
(313) 882·2222 ' MCNISA/DISC 
91

--- Page 92 ---
COOK'S MARKET 
CHOCOLATIER EN P ROVENCE 
Hand-made gourmet chocolates, 
shipped direct from France. 
At the 1 994 International Festival of 
Chocolate in Montbeliard, France, competing 
against 85 chocolate makers from France, 
Belgium, Switzerland, and Germany, 
Puyricard was awarded five first prizes and 
the International Prize of Excellence as best 
of show. Cal 707-431-0223 for a fre brochure. 
(nIE)D* 
ɧlttJSUQI ɥ Exotɦ 
Spice blends, herbal teas 
Speciality Items 
A true culinary adventure. .. 
• .. 
For free catalog send SASE to: 
" Herb 'n' Lore 
< 11 Nadine Court, Thousand Oaks, CA. 
91320-4411 
i .• . 
(805) 499-7505 
: .غ ع:ظ 
.
'
 
92 
Confection of the 
Month Club 
Enjoy chocolates, 
fUdges
, 
toffees, britties, truffles and other 
specialty candies from across the 
country delivered to your door monthly. 
Only 815.95/Month +s/h 
INDULGE YOURSELF! 
""/,j'/̓"/""A-'/ 
FURNITURE 
p.0. Box 26191 • 
S
hawnee 
Mission, KS 66225 
CLASSIFIEDS 
The CLASSIFIED rate is $6.00/word, minimum IS 
words. Payment must accompany order. Send to Fine 
Cooking Adv. , Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506. 
August/September deadline is May 15, 1995. 
Introductory Offer! 
Call today 1-800-233-5443 
SAVE! SNAP-LID FOOD STORAGE CON­
TAINERS -durable plastic, freezer-to-microwave. 
8 each 8 oz. and 16 oz., $ 13.95 includes S\H. Other 
sizes available. Visa/MC accepted. SOUTHEAST­
ERN CONTAINERS, 1 -800-888-7352. 
for a free catalog and receive a coupon 
for 20% off your f"trSt order 
LA CUISINE 
- Cookware, juicers, serving sets, 
kitchenware. FREE CATALOG! Write SKAAREN 
& ASSOCIATES, Attn: Dept. C, 5 1 7 South Ho­
race Ave., Thief River Falls, MN 56701-9963. 
1 -800-376-7 181 (24 hrs.) Visa/MC welcome. 
Over 30 hard to find flavors 
ϹϺϊϋϸϷsω
aόCύIC;ώϏϐϑ, 
Pecan Cream, English Toffee, Mexican Liqueur, 
Butternut Rum, and more. 
Reach and sell 
Food and Cooking 
Enthusiasts 
with an ad in 
KNIFE SHARPENING SERVICE. Your cutting 
instruments can only complement your culinary ex­
pertise. Call right now for fast, professional service. 
1-3 12-767- 1 509. 
DELECTABLE SAUCES, SALSAS & CONDI­
MENTS! Free catalog. International gourmet line. 
Recipes included. 1 -800-895-3058. RENEE'S 
GOURMET PANTRY. 
FINE COOKING 
For information call 
1-800-926-8776, ext. 445 
PAMPERED CHEF - Teach cooking classes to sell 
quality kitchen products. Set your own schedule. 
Training provided. Low investment, no inventory or 
deliveries. Member D.S.A. Betsy 612-783-8787. 
ADVERTISER INDEX 
Alos 77 
Antique Mall & Crown 
Restaurant 23 
Arden's Gardens 9 1 
Armeno Coffee 90 
Arrowsmith Trading 89 
The Bean Bag 89 
Berres Brothers 92 
The British Shoppe 89 
Brugger Brothers 90 
Cafe de Thai 92 
California Culinary Academy 1 3 
California Winemakers Guild 13 
Calphalon 21 
Chef Revival 21 
Chefs Choice 2 1 
Chefs Collection 9 1 
Chefwear 1 2 
Chesapeake Bay Gourmet 9 1 
Chesapeake Express Ltd. 89 
Chicken Expressions 90 
Chile La Isla 88 
CND Marketing 92 
Cocoa Beach Coffee Co. 89 
Contadina 95 
Cooking with Flowers and 
Flour 24 
Culver Duck Farms 90 
Desert Glory 26 
Don Alfonso Foods 27 
Don Francisco Coffee 91 
Duhnke Furniture 92 
EarthStone Wood-Fire 
Ovens 88 
Egg Farm Dairy 91 
Embellishments 15 
Excel by Revere 7 
Fancy Foods Gourmet Club 25 
G & R Publishing Co. 88 
Gourmet Pasta of the Month 
Club 1 5 
Gregg's Seasoning 88 
Hendrix Farm 2 1 
Herb 'n' Lore 92 
Info Edge Publications 9 1 
Int'l Home Cooking 88 
Interweave Press 19 
Jesse Jones 17 
Josey B. (U.S.A.) Corp. 90 
KC) Vanilla 25 
Kitchen Joy 1 1 
Lamson & Goodnow 13 
Land 0' Lakes 28, 29 
Le Cordon Bleu Book, Video 17 
Lifetime Career Schools 90 
Maille Mustard 14 
Mama Nelcionii 91 
Mangia Software 25 
Mariner Tours 79 
May tag Dairy 1 7 
MBI, Inc. 2 5 
Menu Master 89 
Minor's Bases 91 
MJB Gourmet 90 
Mount Horeb Mustard 
Museum 9 1 
Mr. Pepper 90 
Mushroom of the Month 
Club 25 
Naked Gourmet 91 
Narrow Way Co. 24 
National Dairy Board 87 
National Pork Council 8, 9 
New England Culinary 
Institute 27 
North Country Smokehouse 1 3 
North West Mushroom Co. 9 1 
Peter Kump's N.Y. Cooking 
School 20 
Phamous Phloyd's 89 
Phillips Mushrooms 89 
Professional Cutlery 
Direct 89, 90 
Puyricard Chocolate 92 
Rafal Spice Co. 89 
Rums of Puerto Rico 5 
The School of Culinary Arts 89 
Scottsdale Culinary 
Institute 25 
Shaw Guides 90 
Shoalwater Bay Oyster Co. 91 
Stonehill Farm 89 
Sullivan College 1 5 
Sun Burst Farms 88 
Swanson Broth 2 
Sweet Discoveries 92 
Swissco Foods 88 
Teitel Bros. 90 
U. S. Personal Chef 24 
Uncharted Grounds 88 
Upton Tea Imports 88 
The Victorian Cupboard 2 1 
Victoria's Vinegars 9 1 
Waterford Nut Co. 89 
Watkins Spices 90 
Western Culinary Inst. 9 1 
Windsor Vineyards 20 
WGsthofKnives 79 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 93 ---
RECIPES 
COVER RECIPES 
Creme Caramel 72 
Cornish Game Hens Roasted with 
Spring Vegetables 33 
BREADS 
Sponge 52 
Italian Bread 53 
Walnut Honey Bread 52 
Whole-Wheat Currant Rolls 53 
DESSERTS, CAKES (;{ PASTRY 
Creme Caramel: 
Basic 72 
Citrus 75 
Coffee 75 
Ginger 75 
Floating Raspberry White Chocolate 
Mousse Cake 59 
Poppy Seed Cake with 
Lemon Curd 34 
Rumpot 40 
MAIN DISHES 
Fish/Shellfish 
Salmon with Sheep Sorrel 
Sauce & Dumplings 55 
Meat 
Roasted Rack of Lamb 44 
Poultry 
Cornish Game Hens Roasted with 
Spring Vegetables 33 
Recipe (analysis per serving) 
Greens with Goat Cheese Croutons 
Cornish Hens with Spring Vegetables 
Poppy Seed Cake with Lemon Curd 
Game Hens with Squash & Sage 
Grilled Game Hen for Summer 
Parmesan-Prosciutto Game Hens 
Vegetable Stock 
Mushroom Stock 
Corn Stock 
Lemongrass Stock 
Rack of Lamb with Herb Crust 
Morel Stew with Hasty Pudding 
Morels, Mussels & Saffron Cream 
Walnut Honey Bread 
Whole-Wheat Currant Rolls 
Italian Bread 
Salmon with Sheep Sorrel Sauce 
White Chocolate Mousse Cake 
White Bean Soup with Infused Oil, 
Parmesan & Sofregit 
Coriander Chutney 
Yellow Rice with Pigeon Peas 
Pakistani Potato Kebabs 
Guacamole with Coriander 
Creme Caramel 
Game Hens with Squash 
& Sage 35 
Grilled Game Hen Salad 35 
Parmesan-Prosciutto Game Hens 35 
Vegetable 
Yellow Rice with Pigeon Peas 70 
SALADS 
Tossed Greens with Baked Goat 
Cheese Croutons 33 
SAUCES, CONDIMENTS (;{ 
SEASONINGS 
Mayonnaise: 
Basic 78 
Ginger, Lime & Cilantro 78 
Rouille 78 
Charmoula 35 
Coriander Chutney 69 
Guacamole with Coriander 70 
Herb Crust for Lamb 44 
Infused Oil 65 
Mustard Coating for Lamb 44 
Shallot Vinaigrette 33 
Shiso Vinaigrette LO 
Sofregit 65 
SIDE DISHES 
Pakistani Potato Kebabs 70 
Yellow Rice with Pigeon Peas 70 
SOUPS, STEWS (;{ STOCKS 
Creamy Morel Stew with 
Hasty Pudding 48 
Page 
Calories 
Protein Carb 
total 
fat 
(g) 
(g) 
33 
370 68% 
10 
22 
33 
690 46% 
53 
40 
34 
480 54% 
7 
51 
35 
690 52% 
51 
28 
35 
340 62% 
26 
6 
35 
410 48% 
44 
7 
39 
30 
0% 
7 
39 
30 
0% 
1 
7 
39 
15 
0% 
0 
3 
39 
10 
0% 
0 
3 
44 
470 58% 
41 
7 
48 
270 64% 
4 
1 5 
48 
420 47% 
16 
22 
52 
90 36% 
2 
1 2 
53 
160 14% 
5 
31 
53 
60 
0% 
2 
1 2 
55 
670 53% 
35 
43 
59 
530 55% 
8 
32 
65 
410 52% 
1 5 
37 
69 
80 74% 
1 
6 
70 
220 34% 
5 
32 
70 
70 61% 
6 
70 
45 75% 
1 
3 
72 
220 26% 
6 
35 
Morels & Mussels with 
Saffron Cream 48 
Vegetable Stock: 
Basic 39 
Com 39 
Lemongrass 39 
Mushroom 39 
White Bean Soup 65 
TEC H N IQUES 
Boning game hens 3 1 
Cutting cake 61 
Flavoring custard 75 
Frenching rack oflamb 43 
Gathering & eating wild food 57 
Glazing a cake with chocolate 60 
Lining a mold with caramel 72 
Loosening cake from the pan 61 
Making caramel 72 
Making custard 73 
Pairing food & wine 62-65 
Pureeing raspberries 59 
Reconstituting dried morels 46 
Roasting game hens 3 1 
Roasting rack oflamb 44 
Roasting vegetables 38 
Safe poultry handling 3 1 
Sponge method for breads 50-52 
Stuffing poultry under the skin 33 
I N G REDIENTS 
Berries for rumpot 40-41 
Bull thistle 56 
Caramel, making 72 
Chickweed 54 
INDEX 
Coriander, about 66-69; freezing 68; 
storing 68; washing 68 
Cornish game hens, about 3 1 ; 
boning 3 1 ; roasting 3 1 ; stuffing 
under the skin 33 
Custard, flavoring 75; making 72 
Dandelion flowers & leaves 56 
Lamb, about 42; frenching 43; 
removing deckle 43; roasting 44 
Motels, about 45-46; cleaning 48; 
cooking 46; selecting 46; 
sources 47; storing 46; 
varieties 46 
Mushrooms for stocks 39 
Purslane 56-57 
Sheep sorrel 56 
Vegetable stocks 38 
Sponge starters for bread 5 1 
NUTRITION INFORMATION 
Fats (g) 
Chol 
Sodium 
Fiber Notes 
total sat 
mono poly 
(mg) 
(mg) 
(g) 
28 
7 
1 7 
2 
15 
350 
2 
1 Tbs. vinaigrette 
35 
14 
13 
6 
180 
700 
8 
29 
14 
8 
1 
185 
210 
2 Tbs. lemon curd 
40 
15 
14 
8 
180 
670 
9 
23 
5 
1 3 
4 
75 
310 
2 
2 Tbs. charmoula 
22 
8 
8 
3 
225 
1480 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
190 
1 cup 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
190 
1 cup 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
210 
1 cup 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 70 
1 cup 
30 
9 
16 
2 
1 35 
290 
based on 3 portions 
19 1 2 
6 
1 
65 
45 
22 
1 0 
8 
2 
85 
260 
2 
3.5 0.5 
1 .0 2.5 
0 
160 
1 
1 oz. 
2.5 0.5 
1 .0 
1 .0 
0 
540 
3 
1 oz. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
210 
0 
1 oz. 
40 
6 
25 
6 
185 
1 140 
4 
43 
19 
1 2 
2 
205 
60 
4 
24 
4 
16 
2 
5 
700 
9 
7 
6 
0.5 0 
0 
270 
2 
l,4 cup 
8 
2 
2 
4 
0 
550 
4.5 3.0 
1 .5 
0 
1 0 
1 05 
1 kebab 
4.0 0.5 
2.5 
0.5 
0 
0 
1 
l,4 cup 
6 
3 
2 
1 
1 70 
80 
0 
The nutritional analyses have been calculated by a registered dietitian at The Food Consulting Company 
the calculations. Optional ingredients and those listed without a spec@ic quantity are not included. 
of San Diego, California. When a recipe gives a choice of ingredients, the first choice is the one used in 
When a range of ingredient amounts or servings is given, the smaller amount or portion is used. 
APRIL/MAY 1995 
93

--- Page 94 ---
liDBITS 
A Good Loaf of Bread 
E
very night when I was a kid, my father 
carried home paper bags stuffed with 
fresh breads from the small New Jersey 
bakery where he worked. One evening, 
Pop asked my opinion of the pumpernickel 
I chewed. Only grownups talked about 
those things, and I sensed another obliga­
tion flowing my way. Pop began to lecture 
in his German accent about the different 
qualities of the loaves on our dinner table. 
I stared at the slab of bread in my hand. 
Critiquing bread would now be added 
to my evening routine of taking out the 
garbage, playing the piano, and doing 
homework. Pop asked if I thought too 
much salt was used. Had the dough been 
kneaded properly? Why did I think one 
rye loaf tasted better than another? How 
did it look? What made a good bread? 
I started to be able to identify agree­
able or deficient characteristics in bread 
when I surrendered to my taste buds in­
stead of trying to guess what Pop thought. 
He encouraged me, but hedged at total 
agreement with my answers because I was 
neglecting a vital ingredient, an ingredi­
ent that's never included with any direc­
tions, but can be tasted by anyone who 
participates in the act of creating. But 
94 
before Pop had a chance to lead me into 
the bakery to show me his process, Mom 
made other plans for me. 
She insisted it was impossible for me to 
become a concert pianist or a surgeon if I 
baked at five in the morning. That settled 
the issue. Analyzing the staff of life during 
meals was one thing, but to beat the rising 
sun for Pop's life secrets wasn't on my list 
of priorities. Already I didn't have enough 
time to spend with my girlfriend and play 
sports. I needed fewer hours with Pop, not 
more. Pop stopped asking about the mys­
terious missing ingredient, and that was 
fine with me. 
Pretending to play piano ended when 
I was a high school senior, and so did the 
time to learn Pop's baking secret. But 
when I grew up and lived on my own, 
there were plenty of good bakeries in my 
neighborhood; getting good bread was 
no problem. 
Last year, 25 years after my nightly cri­
tiques with Pop, I finally learned his secret 
for creating an ideal loaf. My discovery 
was fueled by a hunger to eat good bread 
after moving to an area of New Mexico 
where bakeries offered only pseudo breads 
no more satisfying than those on super­
market shelves. 
Flipping through a cookbook, I saw the 
picture of my desire: a plain, hard-crusted 
French baguette. I gathered yeast, salt, 
flour, and sugar to start the process. 
I mixed the ingredients and threw my 
fingers into the gooey mass to pinch and 
twist it. It was such a mess that I thought it 
wouldn't work. Caked dough covered my 
arms and the blob looked as if it had oozed 
out of some science-fiction movie. Turn­
ing it into a smooth ball seemed impos­
sible, but eventually the slime evolved 
into a shaggy clump. I used the book's 
kneading diagram as a guide to push, pull, 
turn, and slap the clump. After several 
minutes that seemed like hours, I felt and 
saw the transformation from shaggy mon­
ster to glossy sphere. The crucial stage was 
over. As I greased a bowl, put the dough in 
it, and covered it with a towel, I realized 
I had no baking sheet. 
I tore around the house, trying to find a 
substitute. A piece of flagstone from my 
walkway worked. Thick, yeasty aromas 
filled my home as I scooped the dough 
from the bowl with a spatula. Then I cut 
and molded the puffy bundle into four 
long, slender rectangles and arranged 
them on the slab. I slashed diagonal lines 
in the tops, brushed them with egg whites, 
put the flagstone in the oven, and threw 
in some ice cubes to ensure good crusts. 
Delighted with my progress, I phoned 
two friends, offering cold cuts stacked be­
tween fresh baguettes. My guests arrived 
as I put the tanned, crisp-crusted loaves 
on the windowsill to cool. The crackling 
sounds of the crusts warmed me more 
than any fireplace. My friends tore the 
baguettes open and slapped butter on 
them. Their compliments pleased me, but 
I found myself asking the same questions 
Pop had asked me as I saw the hard butter 
melt on the feathery interior. How do they 
look? Is the texture too tough? Is the crust 
too soft? Then I tasted a chunk. It had a 
crunchy crust and was tender inside, but 
the bottom was too brown. My friends dis­
agreed as they snatched another loaf off 
the windowsill. 
Ignited by the experience, I made an­
other batch the next day, improvising 
from the directions. This time the loaves 
were better. 
In his wisdom, Pop knew I had to dis­
cover for myself the secret of baking good 
bread, and he was gracious enough not to 
drag me into the bakery. He understood 
that in a world where it takes hard work 
just to be mediocre, you must have pas­
sion to consistently be good. As a child 
eating dinner, I never would have been 
persuaded that love was the secret ingre­
dient, that the act of creating and sharing, 
the poetry of feeling, and the compulsion 
to produce is what one needs to bake good 
bread. Time and longing allowed me to 
appreciate the rich pleasure of the process 
that results in a good loaf of bread, other­
wise unavailable at any price. 
-N. Jurgen Reinsuch 
Las Vegas, New Mexico • 
We buy stories about culinary adventures. 
Send them to Fine Cooking, PO Box 5506, 
Newtown, CT 06470-5506. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 95 ---
NO, WE DIDN'T CREATE 
TORTELLONI. 
WE JUST PERFECTED IT. 
OUR CHEESE AND BASIL TORTELLONI IS A WORK OF ART. A MASTERPIECE THAT'S ALWAYS 
FRESHLY MADE AND REFRIGERATED TO STAY THAT WAY, FOR A TENDERHEARTED TASTE THAT'S 
HARD TO RESIST. TRY IT WITH OUR LUSCIOUS, N EW PESTO WITH SUN DRIED TOMATOES, 
CREATED BY THE CH EFS AT CASA BUITON I , OUR CULINARY ARTS CENTER IN THE TUSCANY 
REGION OF ITALY. IT'S EVERYTH I NG YOU NEED TO CREATE A LITTLE GENIUS OF YOUR OWN. 
© 1994 S.P. N .. NESTLਥ REFRIGERATED FOOD COMPANY

--- Page 96 ---
Not for Children Only 
Pastry artist Rebecca Russell, of New York City, has cleverly 
updated our favorite nursery rhymes-in marzipan. 
From Mother Goose's gently draping skirts to the bas-relief 
columns and medallions ringing its base, the decorations on this 
award-winning cake are entirely edible.