--- Page 1 ---
TAUNTON'S 
The Key to 
Homemade 
Ice Cream 
Fresh Melons 
in Sorbet, 
Salad, Salsa 
Poaching 
Flavorful 
Cold Salmon 
Mellow 
Roasted 
Garlic 
$4.95 CAN $5.95 
09 
• 
AUGUST / SEPTEMBER 1995 NO. 10 
me 
FOR PEOPLE WHO LOVE TO COOK

--- Page 2 ---
Your dishwasher detergent alone can't get 
your dishes sparkling clean. That's because 
detergents can leave spots and residues on 
your dishes. Jet-Dry® products work in the 
rinse 
cycle 
where 
detergents 
can't-­
removing all spots and residues to take 
dishes one step beyond clean to 
sparkle. Load after load. 
./ -
!ffB} 
f'IlI 
Use Jet-Dry Sparkle Spot and Residue 
Remover to keep all your dishes spot-free 
and sparkling. And try Jet-Dry Ultra Film 
Fighter to cut through built-up film for 
sparkling clean dishes with every wash. 
So get Jet-Dry. And give your detergent 
the help it needs. 
Go one step beyond clean to sparkle. 
©1995 
BerckIser 
ililstroer ProclocIS. 'f"Y:'

--- Page 3 ---
fine 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 ISSUE 10 
DEPARTMENTS 
4 Letters 
10 Q&A Adapting recipes 
to convection ovens, 
cleaning cast iron safely 
16 Notes Fine sherry 
vinegar, a new wine saver 
20 Tips Fitting pan liners, 
preparing eggplant 
74 Basics Handling 
shrimp, blanching 
vegetables, fire safety 
78 Food Science 
Melting chocolate 
80 Reviews Four views 
of Indian cooking 
84 Flavorings Saffron 
86 Presentations 
Douglas Rodriguez 
88 Calendar 
92 Advertiser Index 
93 
Recipe & 
Technique Index 
93 
Nutrition 
Information 
94 Tidbits 
On the cover: Grilled Pototo Salad, 
"Smoky-Sweet Grilled Vegetables," 
p. 24; inset, Hazelnut-Mocha Ice 
Cream, "The Key to Homemade 
Ice Cream, " p. 69. 
Cover photo, Susan Kahn; inset, Mary Ellen Bartley. 
This page: rop, Bradley O. Pomeroy; middle. Ellen 
Silvennan; bottom, Mary Ellen Bartley. 
ARTICLES 
24 Smoky .. Sweet Grilled Vegetables by Molly Stevens 
Almost any vegetable tastes great hot off the grill 
A guide to grilling vegetables 28 
30 Savoring Summer Melons by Georgeanne Brennan 
Try any one of the dozens of varieties in a salsa, sorbet, or salad 
36 Poaching for Flavorful Cold Salmon by Paul Bertolli 
Keeping fish moist and delicious is easy with a few simple techniques 
41 Drying Your Garden's Harvest by Jane Selover 
Turn summer's crop into colorful condiments for year-round use 
44 Classic Tomato Sauce by Elayne Robertson Demby 
For a thick, full-flavored sauce, there's no substitute for time 
Try the classic sauce or one of a trio of variations 47 
48 Triple .. Layered Dessert Bars by Patricia Ann Heyman 
These easy confections can be elegant, too 
52 Roasting Garlic Tames Its Fire by Susan Asanovic 
Turn these pungent cloves into a mellow flavoring 
More uses for roasted garlic 53 
54 Choosing Beer to Complement Any Dish 
by Martin Nachel From Pilsner to porter, beer is an easy match for food 
A guide to matching food and beer 56 
59 Custom .. Cutting Beef Tenderloin by Matthew Lust 
For fresher, less expensive steaks and roasts, cut your own 
How to cook a steak by Richard Chamberlain 61 
62 A Mediterranean Feast by Lissa Doumani 
The traditional mezze means "welcome" to a sumptuous meal 
69 T he Key to Homemade Ice Cream by Andrew Hingston 
An ice-cream pro shares his recipes and a secret ingredient 
Fine Cooking aSSN 1072·5121) is published bimonthly by T he Taunton Press,lnc., Newtown, Cf06470-5506. Tel. 203/426-8171. Second-class postage is paid at Newtown, 
Cf 064 70 and at additional mailing offices. GST paid registration # 123210981. U.S. distribution by ICDlThe Hearst Corporation, 250 West 55th St., New York, NY 10019 
and Eastern News Distributors, Inc., 1130 Cleveland Rd., Sandusky, OH 44870. 
Savoring summer 
melons 
36 Cool poached 
salmon 
48 Triple-layered 
dessert bars 
Postmaster: Send address changes to Fine Cooking, The Taunton Press, Inc., 63 South Main Street, PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506. Printed in the USA

--- Page 4 ---
LETTERS 
If you'd like to share your thoughts 
on topics like genetically engineered 
tomatoes, our most recent baking 
article, or your food and cooking 
philosophies, here's the place to do 
so. Send your comments to Letters, 
Fine Cooking, PO Box 5506, Newtown, 
CT 06470-5506. 
NIX TO CRISP GREEN VEGETABLES 
Why do you think that green vegetables 
have to retain their raw color when 
cooked? I refer to the article called "Con­
trolling Color Changes in Vegetables" by 
Shirley O. Corriher (Food Science, Fine 
Cooking #7, p. 76) . 
There is a fine line between over­
cooking a vegetable and getting it just 
right. A few hours is too long; a few min­
utes is not long enough. Seven-minute 
broccoli and green beans taste like what 
I imagine grass to taste like. 
We just had green beans for supper. 
They cooked slowly in a bit of chicken 
broth and some chopped shallots for 
about half an hour, then in a little olive 
oil and tomato concasse for another five 
minutes, and they were tender, moist, 
tasty, and probably even good for us. 
They were a lovely muted green. They 
weren't supposed to look raw, because 
they weren't meant to taste raw. 
If we want raw vegetables, we can leave 
them that way, and they're fine in certain 
instances. But for me, the barely cooked 
trend leaves the vegetables neither raw 
nor cooked. Wasn't it Edna Lewis who, 
when asked how long she cooks vege­
tables, said grimly, "Until they're done"? 
-Elaine McCool, 
Bainbridge Island, WA 
STORING GARLIC IN OIL? ADD 
SOME VIN EGAR TO MAKE IT SAFE 
Regarding Elaine Lickteig's letter ex­
plaining the risks of botulism associated 
with storing garlic in oil (Fine Cooking #7, 
p. 4) : this is not the whole story. You can 
store garlic safely in oil if you have previ­
ously soaked the garlic cloves in vinegar 
for 1 2 to 24 hours. This technique was 
described in Organic Gardening magazine 
(September/October 1 994) . The piece 
explains that the vinegar soak will in­
crease the acidity of the cloves without 
affecting their flavor. This increase in 
4 
acidity will eliminate the risk of botulism, 
which can develop in poorly stored low­
acid foods. 
-Paula Simmons Green, 
Sardis, BC 
DON'T WASTE PLASTIC BAGS 
I was troubled by Roy Overton's tip on 
using plastic bags to simplify clean-up (Fine 
Cooking #8, pp. 22-23). I'm not an envi­
ronmental fanatic, and I use plastic wrap 
and plastic bags when appropriate. How­
ever, we should all be trying to minimize 
our use of nonreusable materials where 
reusable alternatives are available. I've 
never found it all that burdensome to wash 
the bowl in which the bread dough rose or 
the covered dish in which I microwaved 
my vegetables. A pastry bag allows you to 
fill muffin tins as neatly as a plastic bag 
does, and it's kinder to the environment. 
-Cyndy Ainsworth, 
Palo Alto, CA 
THIS COOK LIKES MASTERCOOK II 
In response to the letter titled "Wanted: 
Ideal Cooking Software" (Fine Cooking 
#7, p. 6) : 
I use MasterCook II by Arion Soft­
ware. It costs about $35, it is very easy to 
use and has many functions. Typing in 
recipes is easy because of the ingredient­
name recognition feature. If the program 
recognizes the name, that means that it's 
already in the program, along with all the 
available nutritional information. When 
a recipe has been entered, you then can 
process the recipe in several ways : 
• write a grocery list; 
• scale the recipe up or down; 
• list the nutritional information; 
• calculate the cost of the recipe (if 
you've entered all the figures) ; 
• plan your menu; 
• and print recipes to share with friends. 
MasterCook II is user-friendly when it 
comes to searching for recipes or organ­
izing all your recipes into "cookbooks." I 
like to be able to plan menus for special 
occasions and store them for future refer­
ence. I also use the program like an index 
to find recipes in magazines that I plan to 
keep. I just enter the title, a few major in­
gredients, the issue and page number, and 
some keyword categories. 
Like anything worthwhile, using this 
software does take time, but it sure is nice 
Editor Martha Holmberg 
Art Director Steve Hunter 
Managing Editor Jan Newberry 
Associate Editor 
Joanne McAllister Smart 
Assistant Editors Dana Harris 
Matthew Kestenbaum 
Copy/Production Editor Li Agen 
Graphic Designer/lllustrator Rosalie Vaccaro 
Editorial Secretary Kim Landi 
Recipe Tester Abigail Johnson Dodge 
Contributing Editors Paul Bertolli 
Shirley O. Corriher 
Molly Stevens 
Publisher Christine Arrington 
Circulation Manager Claudia H. Allen 
Marketing Secretary Jeanne Arendt 
Advertising Manager Tom Leihbacher 
Advertising Accounts Manager Doris Hanley 
Associate Accounts Manager Paul McGahren 
Advertising Sales Coordinator Nancy Crider 
How to contact Fine Cooking: 
Telephone: 
Fax: 
E-Mail: 
800-283-7252 
203-426-8171 
203-426-3434 
America Online: 
FINECOOKNG 
CompuServe: 
74602,2651 
Subscriptions: 
Orders: 
800-888-8286 
Customer Service: 
800-477-8727 
Advertising Sales: 
800-283-7252 x 547 
Taunton Trade Company: 
Retail Sales: 
800-283-725 2 x 238 
Copyright 1995 by The Taunton Press, Inc. No reproduction 
without permission of The Taunton Press, Inc. Fine Coo
W 
is a 
registered trademark of The Taunton Press, Inc. Subscription 
rates: U.S. and possessions, $26 for one year, $42 for two yean;, $58 
for three years; other countries, $32 for one year, $52 for two 
years, $ 72 for three years (in U.S. doHan;, please). Single copy, 
$4.95. Single copies outside U.S. and possessions, $5.95. Address 
correspondence to the appropriate department (Subscription, 
Editorial, or Advertising) I 
The Taunton Press, 63 South Main St., 
PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506. 
Writing an article 
Fine Cooking welcomes article proposals from 
our readers. We acknowledge all submissions, 
return those we can't use, and pay for articles 
we publish. Send proposals to Fine Cooking, 
PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 5 ---
Presenting 
a rice so delicious 
you'll leave the vegetables 
on the table. 
817 Elephant, Pure Basmati Rice. Its 
delicate aroma, long-grain character 
and unmatched flavour is bound to 
PURE BASMATI RICE 
ASK 
FOR 
I T 
BV 
NAME 
MANUFACTURED & PACKAGED BY: 
M/S DEVA SINGH SHAM SINGH 
OUTSIDE CHATIWIND GATE, AMRITSAR 143 001 INDIA. TEL : 282220,282230,282807, 282524. FAX: 91-183-282913 / 224295 
TRADE INQUIRIES: EAST COAST, NE, SE, SOUTH, MIDWEST: HOUSE OF SPICES, 127-40 WILLETS PT BLVD, FLUSHING NY, 11368 TEL. 718-507-4900, 
FAX 718-507-4683· WEST COAST: INDO EUROPEAN fOODS, INC., 1000 AIR WAY, GLENDALE CA 91201, TEL. 818-247-1000, FAX 818-247-9722 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
5

--- Page 6 ---
LETTERS 
to have my recipes in a place where I can 
easily retrieve them. 
-E. Rebecca Crooks, 
Doylestown, PA 
LOOK ONLINE FOR 
MORE RECIPE SOFTWARE 
I noted that in Fine Cooking #7, a reader 
asked about cooking software. There are 
certainly a number of recipe database pro­
grams available through the Internet and 
amateur/hobbyist networks and bulletin 
boards. I have used several MS-DOS and 
Windows programs over the past six years. 
I find that I prefer Meal-Master and Quik­
Book, both readily available shareware 
programs (meaning programs that can be 
downloaded from the network to your PC 
at very little cost or for free) . Each has 
somewhat different features, and each ap­
peals to a particular group of users. Which 
program will suit the user is governed by a 
number of factors, too involved to explain 
in the restricted fornlat of e-mail. 
-Sam Waring, Austin, TX 
A TRUCE ON N UTRITION DATA, 
AND ANOTHER VOTE FOR 
MASTERCOOK II 
I just had to write again to tell you how de­
lighted I was to see, in Fine Cooking #7, 
the resolution of the "to count calories, or 
not to count" debate. As it was my letter, in 
issue #5, that was cited by several other 
readers, I can't help but feel that I've been 
able to contribute to the betterment of 
your fine publication. Placing this infor­
mation in a special section at the end of 
the issue should satisfy just about every­
one: we advocates of nutritional infomla­
tion now have an easy-to-read, well­
designed table to refer to, while all the 
detractors of such a practice can simply 
skip the infonnation. Thank you for such a 
thoughtful, reader-oriented approach to 
the problem. You truly are a magazine "for 
people who love to cook"-all of us. 
By the way, I'd like to tell Mardee 
Wyman, the reader who asked for infor­
mation on recipe software, that I've been 
extremely happy with my MasterCook II 
for Windows. I consider it the most flexible 
on the market, and after entering and 
using a thousand or so recipes, I have yet to 
find a problem with it. 
-Diana Stiegler, 
Albuquerque, NM 
I N PRAISE OF IRRADIATED FOOD 
Thank you for publishing the letter by 
D. B. Cameron, DVM, titled "Food Irra­
diation is Safe and Beneficial" (Fine 
Cooking #8, p. 6) . It cheers me to read a 
rational approach to a topic that usually 
receives irrational, ignorant opposition. 
Irradiation leaves no dangerous 
residue in food, least of all any radio­
activity. As food health authorities Eliza­
beth Whelan and Frederick Stare write 
in their book Panic in the Pantry: Fads & 
Fallacies about the Food You Buy [PROME­
THEUS BOOKS, 1992.235 PP., SOFTCOVER; $13.95. 
ISBN 0-87975-732-9], "Irradiated foods do not 
become radioactive, and the process does 
not generate radioactive waste. Finally, 
there is no similarity between the irradia­
tion process and nuclear weapons pro­
duction .... Food irradiation offers many 
significant advantages. [For example,] ir­
radiation of poultry can greatly curb the 
incidence of salmonella, and irradiating 
pork can do the same for trichinosis." 
Food irradiation is a wonderful tech­
nology that can greatly reduce disease, 
increase the world's food supplies, and ex­
tend human life. I look forward to walking 
into my supemlarket and reading a label 
that says Protected by Irradiation. 
-Linda Mann, 
Bellevue, WA 
BE MORE CAREFUL WITH YOUR 
CANNING INSTRUCTIONS 
In Fine Cooking #6, you published a letter 
stating that in the water-bath canning 
method, you don't need to sterilize the 
canning jars before canning. This kind of 
generalization cannot be made about 
water-bath canning. According to the 
USDA Home Canning Guidelines for 
produc.ts such as jams, jellies, and pre­
serves that are processed for less than 
10 minutes, you should use sterilized can­
ning jars. The Ball Corporation gives the 
same recommendation as the USDA. I 
feel, very strongly, that this statement 
should be clarified for the readers. 
Here is the ordering information for 
the book, which is called Complete Guide 
to Home Canning, USDA Extension 
Service, Agricultural Information Bul­
letin #539. Send a check or money order 
for $2.75 to Superintendent of Docu­
ments, PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 
15250, or call 202/5 1 2-1800 for Visa and 
MasterCard orders. 
-Bharati Koli Rastosi, PhD., R.D. 
Editors' note: In the article "Hand­
Crafted Salamis," by David Gingrass 
(Fine Cooking #7, p. 56) , we stated that 
the curing salt used to make these sau­
sages is a mix of sodium nitrate and so­
dium nitrite called "Prague powder." In 
fact, this blended curing salt mix is called 
"Prague powder #2." • 
Taunton 
PUBLICATIONS 
T he Taunton Press: Paul Roman, chainnan; Janice A. Roman, 
president; Peter Chidsey, executive vice president; Carolyn 
Kovaleski, administrative secretary. Corporate Editorial: John 
lively, editor in chief & vice president; Jennifer Renjilian. Books: 
Monica Murphy. Prine Production: Dee Flanagan, Lynda MorriS, promOtion; T homas Greco, Deborah 
Baldwin, books; Philip VanKirk, Tracie Pavlik, magazines. Video: Craig Umanoff, Thomas Menard. 
Corporate Marketing: Douglas Newton, circulation director; Diane Patterson, Sarah Roman. 
Fulfillment & Operations: Thomas Luxeder, director; Jane Torrence. Client Services: Patricia Williamson, 
manager; Carolyn Arneth, Kathryn Dolson. Subscrioc>r Services: Patricia Malouff, manager; Penny Lefferts, 
Barbara Smith, Siri Wheeler. Order Processing: Megan Sangster, manager; Nancy Brown, Barbara Lowe, 
Dawn Teixeira, Marylou Thompson. Data Entry: Carole Ando, manager; Bonnie Beardsley, Margaret 
Faincr, Madelaine Frengs, Tracy LeBrun, Debra McCormack, Gina Pabis, Andrea Shorrock. 
Disfribtdion: Paul Seipold, managerj Michael Capalbo, James Chappuis, Mary Ann Costagliola, Maureen 
Flynn, Linnea Ingram, Brian Leavitt, Frederick Monnes, Alice Saxton, Eileen Sheehan. Purchasing & 
Facilities: William Schappert, manager; Christopher Myers, Lois Beck, Cynthia Carroll, Beatrix Vangor, 
Charles Hollis, Robert Weinstein, Arthur Williams, Susan Nerich, Oscar Carranza, Lincoln Peters, 
Robert Toth. Cafeteria: Donna Freeman, manager; Geraldine Benno, Norma· Jean Taylor. Data 
Processing: Robert Peters, MI director; Brendan Bowe, Arthur Caron, Maurice Downey, Gabriel Dunn, 
Marjorie Omalyev, Roger Seliga. PC Systems: Heidi \Valdkirch, manager; Barbara Daignault, Robert 
6 
for fellow enthusiasts 
Ruth Dobsevage, managing editor; Peter Chapman, Thomas C. 
McKenna, Sally Smith. New Products: Suzanne Roman, 
managing editor; Jefferson Kolle. Personnel: Carol Marotti, 
manager; Linda Ballerini, Christine Lincoln. Accounting: Wayne Reynolds, controller; Patrick 
Lamontagnc, manager; Jeffrey Sherman, Mary Sullivan, Andrea Henchdiffe, Carol Diehm, Dorothy 
Blasko, Susan Burke, Lawrence Rice, Gayle Hammond, Karen Lewis, Lydia Krikorian, Elaine Yamin . 
Corporate Design: Susan Edelman, director; Robert Olah, Patricia Marmo. Corporate Art: Mary Terrizzi, 
manager; Henry Roth. Amy Bernard, Christopher Casey, Catherine Cassidy, Jodie Delohery. P/wlOgraphy: 
Boyd Hagen, director, Robert Marsala. 
Promo
tion: Philip Allard, manager; D. J. Arneson, \Vendy Bowes, 
Kerstin Heiden, Julia Brine, Mary Beth Cleary, Francesca Arminio. Manufacturing: Kathleen Davis, 
director, Joanne Bisson. Prepress: Austin Starbird, manager; 
tephen Roma, Patricia Sigetti, Deborah 
Cooper, WilIi.m Bivona, David Blasko, Richard Booth. Mark Coleman, Lisa DeFeo, William Godfrey, 
Joseph Pctrahai, Linda Reddington, Chansam Thammavongsa, MargO[ Knorr Mancini, W. Kathy Martin, 
ieisen, J. Larry Kinnear, Rebecca Fanning. Taunton Trade Company: Dale Brown, president; Thomas 
Johnson, sales manager; Frances Allen, Peter Bill, Barbara Buckalew, Donna Weinstein, Linda Yurchishin. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 7 ---
T 
(Fig 1) 
BEL PAESE® 
SEMI·SOFT CHEESE 
R 
E 
N 
D 
s 
E 
(Fig 2) 
10 MINUTES FREE 
LONG DISTANCE 
T 
Spark the next food trend yourself with 
Bel Paese@ - A MasterPiece of Cheese. 
T 
Bel Paese's mellow creamy flavor is ideal with 
fresh fruit, crisp veggie sticks and fresh garden 
salads. You can melt it over crusty bread and 
tender cooked vegetables, or cook it up with 
pasta, rice or potatoes. Use the Bel Paese phone 
card to talk to family and friends and the 
coupon on your next purchase of Bel Paese. 
r-----------O----------, 
: 
rTALW<A 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
Please send check or money order for $10.50 to: 
Trendsetter P.O. Box 555, Brick, NJ 08723. Receive 1 lb. 
of Bel Paese semi-soft cheese in wedges, one phone card 
worth ten minutes of free long distance calling time, and 
a 25<1 off coupon good towards your next purchase of 
Bel Paese. Please allow 4 to 6 weeks for delivery. 
i Name ____________________________ _ 
: Address __________________________ _ 
I : City 
______ 
State_ Zip ___ _ 
I ͬ-----------------------------------
E 
R 
(Fig 3) 
25¢ OFF 
COUPON

--- Page 8 ---
Ȉ:Sollo e 9aD2berelli %:SoJa 
Only Bertolli, Italy's best-selling, 
best-loved olive oil, could bring out the true, 
subtle flavors of such delicious foods as 
Risotto e Gamberetti Risola. 
Of course foods like this are appreciated 
not only in Italy, where Bertolli has been made 
for over 125 years, but here, where families 
like yours have made it the best-loved olive 
oil in America today. 
8ertol/i Risotto e Gamberetti Riso/a 
2 Tbsp. Bertolli Classico 
Olive Oil 
2 Tbsp. diced red onion 
1-1/4 cups imported or 
domestic medium or 
long grain white rice 
1/3 cup dry white wine 
4 to 5 cups unsalted 
chicken broth, kept hot 
over low heat 
12 oz. shrimp. shelled 
and deveined 
1 cup peas 
1 tsp. julienne lemon rind 
1 Tbsp. fresh lemon juice 
1/2 tsp. sa3. or more to taste 
Freshly ground black 
pepper, to taste 
Finely chopped fresh 
basilar Italian parsley 
1. Heat 1 Tbsp. of Bertolli Olive Oil in a large 
saucepan over low heat. Add onion. Cook. stirring, 
until tender, 5 min. Stir in rice and coat with the oil. 
2. Add wine, heat to bOiling; stir over high heat 
until almost evaporated. Stir in 1 cup of the chicken 
broth; stirring, until broth is absorbed. Continue 
adding broth, about 1/2 cup at a time, stirring 
constantly. Each portion should be absorbed 
before adding the next. With last 1/2 cup broth, 
add shrimp, peas, lemon. Cook, uncovered, stirring 
constantly, until broth is absorbed and rice is tender 
to the bite, the dish is moist and creamy, and 
shrimp are cooked through, 5 to 8 min. 
Add remaining 1 Tbsp. Bertolli Olive Oil and lemon 
juice; stir in salt and black pepper, to taste. 
3. Arrange to suit on plate and garnish with fresh 
parsley and/or basil. Serves 4. 
FREE RECIPE BOOK! 
To get your Bertolli Olive Oil Handbook containing 25 delicious recipes and 
money-saving coupons, send $1.25, check or money order, for postage and 
handling to: Bertolli Nutrition Center, P.O. Box 555FC, Gibbstown, NJ 08027.

--- Page 9 ---
BERTOLLI 
IF You WANT IrTo BE BETTER, 
IT BEI'IER BE BERIOLU' Is.QIiii

--- Page 10 ---
Q&A 
Have a question of general interest 
about cooking? Send it to Fine Cooking, 
PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-
5506, and we'll try to find a cooking 
professional with the answer. 
POTATOES ARE NOT POISONOUS 
I've read that sprouted potatoes are poi­
sonous. I know I've served potatoes with 
small sprouts on them, and I don't think 
I've killed anyone. So at what point do 
potatoes become poisonous, and why? 
-Dana Coonfare, Westerville, OH 
John logan replies: Potatoes aren't poi­
sonous; the sprouts are. And even if a 
potato has sprouted, there's no problem 
with the potato; just cut off the sprouts, 
and it's fine for eating. A sprout of any size 
can be toxic, but you'd have to eat many, 
many sprouts to get sick. The same is true 
for potatoes that turn a greenish hue. A 
potato in this condition is called "light­
struck," and it happens when a chemical 
just beneath the potato's skin reacts to 
light. The green part will taste a little bitter, 
but if you peel it off, the rest of the potato 
will taste fine. Both conditions can be re­
tarded by storing the potatoes in a cool, 
very dark place. 
John Logan is the director of advertising and 
quality control for the Maine Potato Board 
in Presque Isle, Maine. 
WHO OWNS A RECIPE? 
I usually give credit to the original 
source of a recipe when I pass it on to 
a friend. Is this necessary? When a 
recipe is changed or modified, is the 
new recipe owned by the new author? 
Can a recipe actually be owned? 
-Michael Rohde, Ellicott City, MD 
Elinor Klivans replies: There are both 
legal and ethical concerns regarding 
recipe ownership, and it isn't all black 
and white. Legally, the Library of Con­
gress does not extend copyright protec­
tion to names, titles, short phrases, ideas, 
systems, or methods. A mere list of in­
gredients is not subject to copyright 
protection, nor are cooking methods. 
Generally, only the particular manner of 
expression is protected under law. 
For recipes, this means that the lan­
guage-the specific words an author uses 
to introduce a recipe or describe a cooking 
10 
method-is protected. If someone takes 
a recipe and simply changes 2 teaspoons 
of vanilla to 1 teaspoon, but keeps the 
rest of the recipe the same and then calls 
the recipe his or her own, that's con­
sidered infringement. 
On the other hand, one can take the 
ingredients of a recipe, translate the in­
troduction and instructions into one's 
own voice, and be protected under the 
law. But while legally that may be fine, 
ethically it isn't. 
That's why crediting sources as you 
pass recipes along to friends, though prob­
ably not necessary, is good practice. All 
you have to do is give credit where it's due. 
I recently wanted to include in my book a 
recipe that I worked on with another cheE 
It was a variation on a cake she developed, 
and I asked her if it would be all right to 
print the recipe and attribute it to her. She 
said she'd be honored. 
When magazines and cookbooks buy 
recipes for publication, they "own" the 
recipe for whatever rights they've bought. 
Publishing companies register the copy­
rights of their authors' recipes, but self­
publishers can do the same by registering 
the directions or instructions of their 
recipes with the Library of Congress. 
(There's a small fee involved.) For more 
information, write to the Register of 
Copyrights, Copyright Office, Library of 
Congress, Washington DC 20559. 
Elinor Klivans is a pastry chef and the author 
of Bake and Freeze Desserts (William Mor­
row, 1994). She moderated a seminar, Recipe 
Copyright: What Makes an Old Recipe 
New, at the International Association of Culi­
nary Professionals 1994 conference. 
TARTARIC ACID FROM G RAPES 
What is tartaric acid? 
-Cathi Cote, Belmont, MA 
A. D. Webb replies: Tartaric acid is one 
of the natural organic acids found in 
plants. Though citric acid and malic acid 
are commonly found in fruits, tartaric 
acid is less widespread. The grape is 
nearly unique in having all three acids. 
Tartaric acid gives grapes their sharp, tart 
flavor. That tartness is an important ele­
ment in the taste of wine. In California, 
winemakers are allowed to add more tar­
taric acid to their wine to balance its fla­
vor, but in France they are not. 
Tartaric acid has a byproduct that's of 
interest to cooks. When the potassium 
salt of tartaric acid separates from wine 
during fermentation, it forms harmless 
crystals called tartrates, which collect on 
the sides of the fermenting tanks. These 
crystalline deposits are then collected 
and processed into what we call cream 
of tartar. 
AD. Webb is professor emeritus of oenology 
at the University of California. He con­
tributed to The Oxford Companion to 
Wine (Oxford University Press, 1994). 
ADJUSTING COOKING METHODS 
FOR CONVECTION OVENS 
How do convection ovens work? How 
do times and temperatures correlate to 
conventional ovens? 
-Ruth Corgan, Cincinnati, OH 
R. Joseph Goode replies: Convection 
ovens, long used in restaurants and by 
commercial bakers, heat the oven and 
your food more quickly and more evenly 
than conventional ovens. They work by 
circulating hot air inside the oven cavity 
with a built-in fan. Just as wind makes 
you feel colder on a chilly day, the mov­
ing air heats food more quickly. 
There are two types of convection 
ovens: pure and hybrid. Pure convection 
ovens force hot air from outside the oven 
into the cavity. Hybrid convection ovens 
keep the heating elements inside, allow­
ing you to switch between convection 
and conventional uses. 
Although each manufacturer provides 
specific use and care instructions, here 
are some general guidelines for convert­
ing times and temperatures from conven­
tional oven use to convection oven use: 
• When baking in a convection oven, 
reduce the temperature by 25 degrees; 
when roasting, however, use the same 
temperature. 
• If an item cooks in a regular oven in 
15 minutes or less, decrease the convec­
tion cooking time by 1 to 2 minutes. If it 
takes 30 minutes, decrease by 5 minutes. 
If it takes more than four hours, reduce 
total cooking time by 30%. 
• Convection cooking browns food 
quickly, so you may need to cover food to 
prevent overbrowning. 
• Covered casseroles benefit little from 
the circulating air, so be sure to cook 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 11 ---
A SPECIAL OFFER TO CELEBRATE 
THE 100m ANNIVERSARY OF LE CORDON BLEU 
THE VIDEOS 
Thanks to this remarkable series of videos, now you can recreate the 
extraordinary cuisine of France right in your kitchen-with the world­
renowned chefs of Le Cordon Bleu's famed teaching staff as your 
perso
nal 
instructors. 
During the course of each exciting, 45-minute video, you1l discover the 
secrets of Le Cordon Bleu's most coveted recipes ... watch some of France's 
foremost chefs p
repare
 
incredible cutinary s
peciali
ties ... and see close-up 
the classic techniques and practical methods you need to prepare a 
fabulous assortment of dishes from an elegant dinner for two to a 
memorable holiday feast. 
Whether you're a professional chef, a serious amateur or looking for the 
perlect gift for you favorite cook, you1l11nd the videos-and the s
peciali
ties 
you 11 learn to creat
Hruly magnifique! 
SINGLE VIDEOS $24.95 ($3.00 SjH ea.) 
DISPLAY SET-S TAPES + COOKBOOK 
$19S.60 (5% shipping) 
CALL 800/888-4046 
THE COOKBOOK 
One hundred classic recipes to celebrate one hundred years of the 
greatest name in French cooking. The ultimate collection of recipes -
traditional and modem - from the world-renowned cooking school Le 
Cordon Bleu. Professional chefs reveal the secrets of the skills behind 
the acclaimed Le Cordon Bleu name. More than 200 color photographs 
show the finished dishes - and the techniques of French cooking. -
CLASSIC FRENCH COOKBOOK 
A $24.95 value comes Free with this offer. 
CALL 800/888-4046 
LIMITED OFFER 
To receive complete 
Video Library and "The Classic 
French Cookbook"­
CALL TODAY 
$198%'1 
+ 5% shipping 
GYilffIiFJ 
COMMERCIAL ALUMINUM COO
Kw
ARE COMPANY, P.O. BOX 583, TOLEDO, OHIO 43697-0583 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995

--- Page 12 ---
Q&A 
covered dishes using the same time and 
temperature given for conventional ovens. 
Depending on the oven design, con­
vection ovens can pose problems for del­
icate pastries like meringues because the 
moving air can cause the pastry to skew 
slightly to one side. Some oven brands 
are better balanced than others, but even 
the most sophisticated ones cause some 
movement. The oven manufacturer usu­
ally provides tips on how to position pas­
tries in the oven for best results. 
R. Joseph Goode is product manager at 
Jenn-Air, which has been making convec­
tion ovens for 16 years. 
HOW AIR CONTACT 
CAN SPOil FOOD 
When you store something in an air­
tight container, why does that prevent 
spoiling or drying? There's still a lot of 
air touching the food. 
-Helen New, Chicago, IL 
Dr. Douglas Marshall replies: Airtight 
containers don't really do much to pre­
vent microbial or chemical spoilage. 
Whether it's a zip-lock bag, plastic wrap, 
aluminum foil, or Tupperware, its true 
function is to prevent the food from dry­
ing out. The exception is dehydrated 
foods, like powdered milk; these should 
be sealed to prevent moisture absorption. 
Bacteria multiplies faster at room 
temperature, which is why we store 
food in the refrigerator; however, the 
cold air that refrigerators blow on food 
is very drying. If a container protects 
the food from this air and keeps the 
food moist, shelf life is extended. Pre­
venting dehydration also prevents fla­
vor loss, because the volatile flavor 
compounds stay in with the moisture. 
Another type of food spoilage-oxi­
dation-occurs within the confines of 
an airtight container. When oxygen 
comes in contact with any food, the 
food begins to deteriorate. This process 
happens much more quickly in foods 
containing large amounts of unsatu­
rated fat. This is why many manufactur­
ers use partially hydrogenated vegetable 
oil; the hydrogenation turns the oil into 
a saturated fat and lengthens the prod­
uct's shelf life. Wine also oxidizes, but 
it's the wine's ethanol that reacts with 
the oxygen. 
12 
Once oxygen has been introduced to 
food, the process can't be stopped; it can 
only be slowed. Storing food in vacuum­
sealed containers is the best method; the 
low temperatures of a refrigerator or 
freezer also slow the oxidation rate. Since 
light also catalyzes oxidation, keeping 
the food away from light also helps. 
While oxidation usually means un­
pleasant rancidity (the smell of old cook­
ing oil, for instance), the process has its 
benefits. Roquefort and sharp Cheddar 
cheeses get their pungency from the pro­
cess of oxidation. 
Dr. Douglas Marshall is an associate pro­
fessor at the Food Science & Technology 
Department at MississiPPi State University 
in Starkville. 
WHAT TO DO WITH LUPINI BEANS 
Lupini beans are reputed to be a tasty 
snack favored by people in some parts of 
the Mediterranean. When customers 
buy them from my distribution com­
pany, however, they say they often find 
themselves with an inedible pot of hard, 
bitter beans. What's the best way to 
cook and serve lupinis? 
-Betty Brown, Seattle, WA 
Sarah B. Davis replies: Lupin beans 
(lupini in Italian) have been around for 
a long time-they helped feed the Roman 
armies-and there are more than 
200 lupini species throughout the world. 
Cooks in the United States, however, 
have been slow to discover this high-fiber, 
high-protein bean. This disinterest has 
been partly due to the fact that lupinis con­
tain a bitter alkaloid, and it isn't easy to 
get rid of it. Lupinis must be soaked in a 
salt-water brine for four days, with a rinse 
of fresh water every twelve hours. (The 
technique mimics the Portuguese tradi­
tion of tying the beans in a burlap sack and 
leaving it in a tide pool for several days.) 
If that technique seems like too much 
trouble, lupini beans are also available 
canned in brine. Check the condiment or 
Italian section of your grocery store. 
Lupinis aren't often eaten as a main 
course. Use them in soup or pickle them 
and eat them as a snack. Lupini flour has 
been developed for making high-protein 
breads and pastas. 
Sarah B. Davis is the marketing director for 
Lupini Foods, Inc., in St. Paul, Minnesota. 
SElECTING SHERRY FOR COOKING 
When a recipe calls for sherry wine, 
what kind of sherry is it talking about? 
I use a so-called cooking sherry because 
I'm at a loss as to what to purchase in 
liquor stores. 
-Elaine Kovacs, Garland, TX 
Paul Bertolli replies: There are several 
kinds of sherry suitable for cooking pur­
poses. The cooking sherry readily avail­
able in supermarkets is not one of those 
kinds; it's made from low-quality sherry 
with added salt. As for the right choice, it 
depends on what you're making. 
If you want the flavor of sherry with 
no additional sweetness, choose a Fino 
or a Manzanilla sherry (the designations 
are on the label) . Both of these are quite 
pale, dry, and delicate, but the Manza­
nilla has a slightly briny tang. 
Amontillado is a fuller, darker sherry 
with an aroma often compared to toasted 
walnuts; it also contains a hint of sweet­
ness. Amontillado is perhaps the best 
overall choice because it can contribute 
a rich, complex flavor to consommes 
and marinades. 
Oloroso sherry is also full-bodied, 
dark, and quite rich. (Cream sherry is a 
very sweet Oloroso.) It's more suitable for 
flavoring sauces or other preparations, 
such as stews, that are savory in them­
selves and wouldn't be overwhelmed by 
the introduction of an assertive or sweet 
element. The other categories of sherry, 
Palo Cortado or Pedro Ximenez/P.X., 
are best for drinking, not cooking: their 
fine, sweet, delicate flavor would get lost 
in cooking. 
Prices for sherry vary widely. You 
don't need to buy the most expensive 
sherry wine for cooking, but you don't 
want to use something you'd never 
drink. Emilio Lustau is one of the largest 
family-owned producers that makes 
top-quality sherry under its own label. 
Other respectable producers include 
Garvey, Duff Gordon, and Croft Jerez. 
Harveys of Bristol is famous for its sweet 
Bristol Cream, but it also produces a 
Club Amontillado, a medium dry sherry 
called Bristol Dry, and a dry Fino called 
Luncheon Dry. 
Paul Bertolli, a chef and co-owner of Oliveto 
Restaurant in Berkeley, California, is a con­
tributing editor to Fine Cooking. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 13 ---
LOWDOWN ON LYME DISEASE 
Are there health concerns in preparing 
and consuming game, such as venison, 
from regions of the country where Lyme 
disease is known to exist? 
-Paul Simons, St. Paul, MN 
Editors' note: Lyme disease, which is 
transmitted by the bite of an infected 
deer tick or black-legged tick, is espe­
cially prevalent in the Northeast. 
David Weld replies: You can't contract 
Lyme disease from butchering or eating 
purchased deer meat. It's illegal to sell 
wild deer for public consumption, and 
the deer sold to restaurants and grocery 
stores are raised in pens where there's 
little danger of exposure to ticks. And 
since deer don't get Lyme disease, they 
can't transmit the bacterium. Even if 
the Lyme bacterium were present in 
your venison, cooking the meat would 
kill it. 
If you hunt deer, the only time you 
have to worry about Lyme disease is 
AUGUST/SEPTEM BER 1995 
when the deer is first killed. There's a 
slight chance that a deer tick that isn't 
already embedded in the deer's skin may 
crawl onto you and possibly infect you 
with the disease. 
David Weld is executive director of the 
American Lyme Disease Foundation in 
Somers, New York. 
USING OVEN CLEAN ER 
ON CAST-IRON PANS 
I regularly use two cast-iron skillets, 
and over the years a greasy substance 
has accumulated on the outer surfaces. 
Nothing seems to remove it, and I'd 
greatly appreciate it if you'd suggest a 
way to remove this stubborn buildup. 
-Harry J. Hall, Gaithersburg, MD 
Billie Hill replies: To get rid of the ex­
cess grease on the outside of a cast-iron 
pan, clean the outside of the pan as if 
you were cleaning the inside of your 
oven-with oven cleaner. 
Set the pan upside down on the 
upper rack in the oven and put a foil-
Q&A 
covered baking sheet on the lower rack 
to catch the grease that will slide off. Set 
the oven to the temperature recom­
mended on the can of oven cleaner. 
When the oven reaches that tempera­
ture, open the oven, spread newspapers 
on the oven door, pull out the upper 
rack, and spray the outside of the skillet 
with the oven cleaner. Push the upper 
rack back in the oven, toss out the 
newspapers, close the door, and let the 
pan clean for the time recommended on 
the oven-cleaner can. Take out the pan; 
the grease should clean off easily with 
soap and hot water. 
If the pan is really dirty, it may take 
more than one treatment to break down 
all the grease. Repeat the process as nec­
essary, but be careful not to get any oven 
cleaner on the inside of the pan. The 
pan's natural nonstick surface takes a 
long time to build up. 
Billie Hill is a customer service representa­
tive for Lodge Manufacturing Company, a 
cast-iron cookware manufacturer in South 
Pittsburg, Tennessee. • 
Discover the professional chef in you 
with the same marvelous equipment 
chefs use. All-Clad, Calphalon, 
Cuisinart, Kaiser, KitchenAid, Krups, 
Henckels, Le CreuseLOver 1,001 
professional kitchenwares. Call for 
your FREE 84-page color catalog, 
Mention code 9048 and receive a 
FREE $5.00 Gift Certificate. 
1-800-338-3232 
CHEF'SCAT
ALOG
ȇ 
13

--- Page 14 ---
Peachy Pork Picante 
Coat one pound cubed boneless 
pork loin with taco seasoning. 
brown in a little oil in a skillet. 
Add an 8-ounce jar of salsa and 
4 tablespoons peach preserves 
to skillet, stir to mix well, cover 
and lower heat. Simmer gently 
for 15 minutes. Preparation lime: 
25 minutes. Serves four. 
Nutrim/ Irifonna/ion, Approxirna/rly, 
prr Srrving: Caloric;: 263, Pro/nn: 24 gm., 
Fa/: 9 grn., Sodium: 762 mg., 
Cholrs/rrol: 70 mg. 
Nu/rim/ analysis donr by TIu Food 
Processor /I Di,/ Analysis Sof/wart. 
Pork da/a from USDA 
Handbook 8-/0 (1991 J. 
Try slir-frying pork slrips wilh some sesame oil and 
julienne V(ggies for an orienlal-slyle dish. 
Pork is more than you remember. 
Cut up some boneless pork loin, and the options are endless. 
Slice strips for stir-fry or fajitas, cut cubes for kabobs or a quick stew 
Go wild with fruits, vegetables, sauces and condiments.

--- Page 15 ---
Boneless pork--chops, slrips, cubes--absorbs Jlavor 
or a marinade in jusl 30 minules. 
Pork Piccata Sandwiches 
Coat 4 pork loin cutlets well 
with lemon pepper. Heat butter 
to sizzling in non-stick skillet. 
Brown cutlets quickly on both sides. 
Place cutlets on sandwich buns; serve 
with lemon wedges and sliced 
tomatoes. Preparation lime: 
15 minutes. Serves four. 
TASTE 
\NHAT'S 
NEXT 
 .. The Other White Meat .. 
You don't even need a recipe, though these will get you started. 
Think of them as "blueprints" and take it from there! 
Pork will go as far as your imagination. 
Nu/rim/ Informa/ion, Approxima/tly, 
per Smin9: Calorits: 341, Pro/rin: 319m., 
Fa/: 10 9m., Sodium: 369 m9., 
CiIO/ts/crol: 85 m9. 
Nu/rim/ analysis donr by TIl( Food 
Promsor II Dirt Analysis Sof/wau. 
Pork data from USDA 
Handbook 8-10 (1991). 
Pork and Jntil are a natural pair. Try simmering cutlels in your favorile jam, mixed with II little vinegar or water. 
For recipes, send a self-addressed, stamped, business-size envelope to: Recipes-Ad, Box 10383, Des Moines, IA 50306. 
America's Pork Producers ©1995 National Pork Producers CounCil In cooperation WIth the National Pork Board.

--- Page 16 ---
NOTES 
I ,(ODUCT OF SPAIN 
Vinegar made from 
sherry has a deep 
flavor that pairs well 
with spicy salad greens. 
Its woody aroma com· 
plements sauteed 
mushrooms, and its 
bright acidity adds 
focus to reductions. 
LA COSECJ1;\ 
Aged Sherry Vinegar 
is Nutty and Robust 
I recently tried the Reserve 25 Very Old 
sherry vinegar imported by Frederick B. 
Seggerman Selections under the label 
La Cosecha. The vinegar, which costs 
about $10 for a 750ml bottle, has a deep 
amber color and an appetizing aroma of 
buttered pecans. It delivers a sharp bite 
(at 8% acidity, it's a little more tart than 
most other vinegars) , but the acidity 
16 
is nicely balanced by a slightly sweet 
afternote. 
While any wine can be made into 
vinegar, sherry vinegar must start with 
sherry wine, and therein lies the differ­
ence. Sherry-the result of a process of 
fermentation, aging, and blending that 
has been refined for centuries in south­
western Spain-gives the vinegar a 
uniquely robust flavor. 
I like sherry vinegar in vinaigrettes, 
and it has a particular affinity for spicy 
and slightly bitter salad greens, such as 
arugula, dandelion, and watercress. I es­
pecially enjoy it in composed salads of 
these greens combined with the meat 
and juices of roasted poultry. 
Try tossing red onions with sherry 
vinegar before roasting them-the 
vinegar and the onions make 
perfect companions. A splash 
of sherry vinegar heightens 
the flavor of wild mushrooms 
browned in a skillet. The 
vinegar's woody aroma and 
bright acidity can also provide 
the right focus to reduction 
sauces made directly in the 
pan and to the finishing of 
longer-cooked brown sauces. 
The methods for aging 
sherry are used for the vine-
gar, too. The age of the vinegar dis­
played on the bottle-Seggerman also 
imports a 10 Year sherry vinegar, for ex­
ample-can be misleading. In making 
sherry, old and new wines are carefully 
blended using an established system 
called a solera. This system consists of a 
network of barrels through which the 
wines of various vintages are blended 
and passed during the course of their 
aging. Traditionally, the barrels are 
stacked in rows with the oldest wines 
on the bottom and the youngest on top. 
Each year, as the oldest wine is drawn 
from the bottom tier, younger wine 
from the next tier up is added to the 
barrel in proportion to the amount of 
old wine removed. 
Sherry wine that has turned to vine­
gar is removed and left to age in its own 
solera, where it is further blended with 
vinegars of other vintages. Therefore, 
the age listed on the vinegar's label is 
often based not on a particular vintage 
but on an average of vintages. A case of 
"buyer beware"? Perhaps. As with wine, 
or any product whose claim of age is re­
lated to its cost, the final proof is in the 
tasting. In the case of La Cosecha Re­
serve 25 Very Old, the price warrants 
the promise. 
For availability in your area, call Fred­
erick B. Seggerman Selections in Haddam, 
Connecticut, at 203/345-344 1 ; or fax 
203/345-3914. 
-Paul Bertolli is a food writer, teacher, and 
restaurant consultant, as well as a con­
tributing editor to Fine Cooking. 
) 
Feather Pastry Brush 
for a Light Touch 
My favorite pastry brush is not only effi­
cient to use but also lovely to look at. It's 
made from an imported European goose 
feather and has a handle of braided quills. 
Its delicate look reflects the situations in 
which it performs best, including brushing 
egg wash over fragile pastry or glazes on 
fruit tarts. Its virtue is that it doesn't dis­
turb the surface of foods as much as a 
bristle brush, but it's too dainty for tasks 
that require heavy-duty brushing, like 
slathering on barbecue sauce. The feather 
brush washes easily in mild soap and warm 
water. With proper care, it should last for 
years, but as it costs only about $1 .99, you 
may want to have a couple of them on 
hand. They're available in gourmet cook­
ware shops and catalogs, such as The King 
Arthur's Flour Bakers Catalogue. 
-Susan G. Purdy, author of As Easy as Pie, 
teaches pastry and dessert techniques at cook­
ing schools across the country. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 17 ---
C
U
L
I
N
A
R Y 
A
R T
S
 
tourpfa<"e ,n o 
lime· honored p
ro{e,u
ion. 
lrom lop indu,J!ry profs-
'lJeuefop your ,'urinary 
sionals /n Qur 71ssocia/(! 
'De'!ree plYXfram. ChOOJe 
selli",! "'tlh ruafily lra" "n,! a/ 7t. f from four foealions: 7flfanla, Venue,; 
&:I1oof ojCufinary 7frls. Bearn Ih. Ĳ 70rl Gauderdafe, and Jrouslon. 
The School or Culinary Arts 
.t DlUSkl\ Of Tlf.AIT I'SnRiI Of UU.'1.t m \II ISnlRll OF fOIT LArDEIDUL THEW ISSTlTliTI. Of IIOl'Slͫ t'iD TIlE COLOUMl NTm.1l Of U1. S(]f 
CA L L T O D AY: 1 - 8 0 0 - 5 4 3 - 4 8 6 0 
Cooking with Flowers and Flour 
by Marie Bonaminio 
Eat Your Centerpiece? 
Why Not? 
Cooking with Flowers and Flour, 
a colorful video and recipe booklet. Stuffed 
Gladiolus, The Garden Boucake, Marigold 
Munchies, and more! The video will show you 
how it's done-fast and easy. Join me in my 
kitchen by ordering OW! $24.95 plus $3.50 
postage (Canadian funds $26.95 plus $3.50) 
check or money order, MC, VISA, AMEX to: 
Cooking with Flowers and Flour 
1 105 West 21st Street, Lorain, OR 44052 
or call 1-800-837-3505 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
FANCY FOODS GOURMET CLUB 
Savory Smoked Seafood, 
Ravishing Roes from Russia, 
Quintessence of Quality 
Offering You the Best in Products, Prices & Service 
Call: 1-800-576-3548 
Write:330-E N. Stonestreet Avenue 
Rockville, MD 20850 
17

--- Page 18 ---
NOTES 
A Wine Saver that Works 
If you've ever poured yourself a glass of 
wine from a bottle that's been opened 
for several days and been disappointed 
by the flat and acrid flavor, you'll be 
pleased to hear about Private Preserve 
wine preserver, one of the few of wine­
dom's innumerable gizmos that's really 
worth having. 
Private Preserve keeps wine fresh by 
keeping oxygen out. Unlike other wine 
preservers, which essentially suck oxy­
gen out of the bottle, Private Preserve 
18 
displaces oxygen by laying down what 
the manufacturer calls a "completely 
safe gas blanket" of nitrogen, carbon 
dioxide, and argon. A few short blasts 
of these inert gases force the oxygen, 
which weighs-less, out of the bottle; the 
heavier gases remain on top of the wine 
creating a barrier against oxidation. 
This process, known as sparging, allows 
the wine to stay fresh for weeks and 
even months. (I can only vouch for its 
effectiveness for up to a week; an open 
bottle of wine never lasts much longer 
around my house.) 
A wine gizmo that's worth 
the price, Private Preserve 
lets you open a bottle of 
wine with impunity. A few 
short blasts of inert gases 
keep leftover wine fresh 
for weeks. 
Private Preserve is particularly useful 
after wine tastings and dinner parties 
that leave a surplus of opened bottles of 
wine that are too good to throw out. It 
also means I don't have to hesitate about 
opening a new bottle of wine when I only 
want a glass to have with my dinner. 
Use Private Preserve to protect more 
than just wine. Other perishable alcohols, 
such as sherry, cognac, and port, will stay 
fresher after a quick spray. Sparkling wines 
are the exception; their carbonation and 
evanescent flavors really don't keep for 
longer than an hour or so after opening. 
Private Preserve also works for highly per­
ishable cooking oils, which suffer from ox­
idation just as wines do. I use it to keep my 
expensive walnut oil from turning rancid. 
Private Preserve boasts more than 
1 20 uses per can. At $9.95, that's less 
than 10 cents a dose: small change for 
saving expensive wine. Noncombustible 
and easy to use, Private Preserve won't 
harm you or the environment. It's pres­
sure fed, contains no fluorocarbons, and 
With Private Preserve, 
I don't hesitate to open 
a bottle of wi ne 
when I only want one 
glass with dinner. 
the can is recyclable. One warning: the 
can feels empty even when full, which 
can be a bit disconcerting. You'll know 
it's empty when it no longer hisses when 
you try to use it. 
In addition to the preservative, you'll 
also need closures that seal the wine 
bottle. Used corks won't do the job. A 
variety of airtight stoppers are available 
in kitchenware shops. 
Look for Private Preserve at fine wine 
shops and in wine accessory catalogs, 
such as The Wine Enthusiast (800/356-
8466) and the International Wine Ac­
cessory Catalog (800/527-4072). For 
more information, call Private Preserve 
at 707/252-4258. 
-Irving Shelby Smith is a professional chef 
and a food and wine writer based in Burling­
ton, Vermont. • 
FI 
E COOKING

--- Page 19 ---
118 8racken Road M
ALO S 
. ontgome 
[914] 457-44do ȆȅYOrk 12549-2604 
ax: [914]457-9083 
All trademarks 
© 1994 ALOS M' 
are the property of ЇcrograPhiCS Corporatio 
elr respective companiЈ

--- Page 20 ---
Tips 
Do you have a clever way to peel vege­
tables, line a cake pan, or keep herbs 
tasting fresh? let us know. Write to 
Tips, Fine Cooking, PO Box 5506, New­
town, CT 06470-5506; or send your tip 
by e-mail (America Online: FINECOOKNG; 
CompuServe: 74602,2651). We pay for 
tips we publish. 
Easier Eggplant 
When preparing eggplant -especially for 
grilling-I like to leave the skin on for fla­
vor and because it helps keep the tender 
flesh from falling apart, but sometimes 
the skin can become a chewy mess. I 
compromise by scoring the entire egg­
plant from top to bottom with a dinner 
fork. The fork's closely spaced tines leave 
fine "stripes" in the eggplant's skin, not 
unlike the way cucumbers are often left 
with stripes of peel. When cooked, the 
skin is much more manageable. 
-Michael]. Wodjenski, 
New Milford, CT 
Flank Steak for Stir9Fries 
Many of my favorite Asian dishes call for 
a small amount of meat with a lot of 
vegetables. The flank steaks I find at my 
local supermarket, however, are usually 
large enough to make two or three 
dishes. So I buy a large flank steak, cut it 
into thirds lengthwise (cutting with the 
20 
grain) , wrap the pieces individually, and 
then freeze them. When I need meat for 
a dish, I remove a piece from the freezer, 
defrost it partially in the microwave, and 
slice it very thin-this time cutting 
across the grain. Because the meat is still 
slightly frozen, it's easier to cut thinner, 
uniform slices. 
-Pat Hobbs, 
Vista, CA 
A Small Tool 
for Small Bones 
One of my favorite, handy 
kitchen tools is an inex­
pensive pair of square­
tip tweezers. They're 
the perfect size and 
shape for removing fine 
bones from fish fillets. 
I feel for the bones by 
rubbing my hand against 
the grain of the fillet, which 
causes the small, hidden bones 
to lift up. Then I simply tweeze the 
bones-like removing a splinter-and I 
have perfect, boneless fish fillets. 
-Lyn Nelson-Joseph 
Houston, TX 
Shower9Cap Bowl Covers 
When you need a container cover and at 
the same time need "head room" for the 
contents, use an inexpensive plastic 
shower cap. The elastic will maintain a 
reasonably tight closure while allowing 
the contents to extend above the top of 
the container. This covering method is 
particularly handy for raising yeast dough. 
The cap can be washed and reused. 
-Kathy Adams, 
Birmingham, AL 
Baby Spoons for 
Tiny Cookies 
When filling small cookies, such as 
thumbprints, I find it useful to use an 
infant's spoon-the kind with a long 
handle and a tiny scoop. It's also a handy 
garnishing tool. 
-Luanne Conroy, 
Lakewood, OH 
Egg9 Free Emulsified 
Dressings 
The traditional method for binding oil 
and vinegar into an emulsified dressing 
is to beat in a raw egg, as in a Caesar salad 
dressing. If you're worried about raw eggs 
and salmonella, however, many great 
dressings could be eliminated from your 
repertoire. Also, egg-emulsified dressings 
tend to have a very short shelf life. I've 
found that you can bind a dressing just 
as effectively by blending it with several 
tablespoons of finely grated hard cheese. 
Asiago works best. The enzymes that 
bind the cheese work just as well to bind 
the oil and vinegar. 
-Jim Rowell 
Duluth, MN 
Sweet Com Year9 Round 
During the summer, most of the corn we 
get from the local farmers' market is 
sweet and juicy. But when summer is 
gone and I have to rely on supermarket 
corn, I have a technique for making it 
taste "farm fresh." I add V2 to 1 full cup 
of milk and 2 tablespoons of sugar to the 
cooking water. This gives tasteless corn a 
fuller, sweeter flavor. 
-Nancy Hoffman 
San Rafael, CA 
(Continued) 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 21 ---
Chef Clo
thin
g Revival': . . 
The Gift For Those Who 
Take Cooking Seriously. 
Feeling like a chef can multiply 
the sheer joy and inspiration of 
serious cooking. And nothing 
makes you feel more like a chef 
than classic, comfortable, kitchen 
wear from Chef Clothing Revival1M 
Designed by Chefs for Chefs®, and 
proven in the great kitchens of the 
world, these garments and acces­
sories make a perfect, 
and greatly appreciated gift for the serious cook in 
your life. Call or write for the complete Chef 
Clothing Revival'" Gift Catalog today. 
1-800-352-2433 
II E V I V A l 12 Dyatt Place, Hackensack, NJ, 07601 
C A R E E R C O O K I N G C LA S S E S 
" The graduates of Peter Kump's 
are intelligent and well-trained. 
They reflect the dedication and 
excellence of the school staff. " 
Michael Romano 
Chef-Owner 
Union Square Cafe 
21 East 16th St., NYC 
(212) 243-4020 
AUGUST/SEPTEM BER 1995 
We couldn't have said it better ourselves. 
At Peter Kump's New York Cooking School 
we're getting people ready for top-level careers - and 
because we require two years of college for admission, 
we can do it in only 20 weeks. 
Who are we? One of the most prestigious cooking 
schools in the world. Our apprenticeship program 
boasts placement in the highest caliber establishments 
both here and abroad. Our graduates work in the most 
exclusive restaurants and pastry 
shops in the country, or run their NEW
PETER
KUMP'S
YORK 
own businesses. Some work as 
food writers and food stylists. 
COOKING 
. 
Start your career at the top. For SCHOOL 
mformation about our career 
. th C I' 
Arts 
d 307 EAST 92 Sf. 
courses m 
e 
u mary 
an 
NEWYORK, NY 10128 
Pastry & Baking Arts, or to learn L...-__ '--_-' 
about our school courses for home cooks, call 
(800) 522-4610 
• Quick • Delicious 
• Low Fat, High Fiber 
• No Salt Added 
Chunky Veggie Hummus 
2-15 oz. cans EDEN Navy Beans, 
drained 
2 tablespoons EDEN Extra Virgin 
Olive Oil 
1 tablespoon EDEN Soy Sauce 
(Shoyu or Tamari) 
1 tablespoon EDEN Brown Rice 
Vinegar (or any quality vinegar) 
3-4 cloves garlic, chopped 
1;2 lemon, juiced 
1 teaspoon cayenne 
1 tablespoon fresh cilantro, chopped 
1-15 oz. can EDEN Diced Tomatoes 
with Green Chilies, drained 
3 green onions, chopped 
Blend first 7 ingredients in a food 
processor or blender until smooth. Fold 
in tomatoes and green onions. 
Variation: 1;2 cup chopped sweet pepper 
or red onion can be added to this 
delicious spread or dip. 
Serve with pita bread, crackers, raw 
vegetables, or chips. 
FREE OFFER 
Please write or call 
for the EDEN Organic Bean Recipe 
Collection. It's yours for the asking. 
800 838-BEAN 
21

--- Page 22 ---
Tips 
I 
I 
, 
/ 
/ / 
, 
, 
, , \ 
\ ࢵ 
CD
! 
, 
I , 
~ 
, 
Pan Liners 
that Fit Perfectly 
Getting a rectangular piece of kitchen 
parchment to fit snugly into a round cake 
pan can be a difficult job. Here's a trick 
that I like to use. 
Take a square or rectangular piece of 
parchment that's about the same width 
as the cake pan you're trying to line. 
Fold it in half and then in half again to 
make a square or rectangle that's a quar­
ter of the original. Next, fold the closed 
edges together to form a triangle. Fold 
the triangle in half along the diagonal. 
Fold once more so that you're left with a 
tight, flat "wedge." Place the pointed tip 
of the wedge on the pan's center point 
and cut the squared end of the wedge to 
fit the pan. Unfold the wedge and you'll 
have a pan liner that's a perfect fit. 
This technique works well for angel 
food cake pans, too. Simply cut the point 
off of your wedge so that it fits the center 
post of your pan. 
-Margaret Woo, 
Mountain View, CA 
Disposable Bottoms for 
Springform Pans 
I used to have a problem when I created 
beautiful, show-stopper cheesecakes in 
springform pans to bring to someone 
else's home. I'd be on my way home-
40 miles away from the partially eaten 
cake-when I would realized that the 
bottom of my springform pan was still 
underneath the cheesecake. 
Recently I came up with this solution 
to the problem. Take a sturdy cardboard 
22 
, I ͪ
/ 
, 
cake circle that's the same size as the 
bottom of the springform pan and cover it 
with aluminum foil. Wrap it at least twice. 
If you don't have a cake circle that fits, 
cut one to fit from heavy cardboard. 
Once wrapped, close the false bottom 
into your springform and put it on a bak­
ing sheet. Don't tempt fate by just putting 
the pan on the oven rack: there's always a 
chance it will leak. 
After transporting your not-to-be­
eaten-at-home dessert, unmold at the 
location, wash your springform ring, and 
take it home without having to worry 
about getting the bottom back. 
-Louise A. Peterson 
Brooklyn, NY 
Electrifying a Crank 
Ice:Cream Maker 
The best ice-cream maker, it seems to me, 
is the one that allows the most control 
over temperature and churning speed. To 
this end, I have combined the tempera­
ture control of my hand-crank White 
Mountain freezer with the variable 
speeds of my KitchenAid mixer. I had a 
local machinist make me a part for $20, 
one end of which fits in the accessory 
drive on the mixer; the other end has the 
same thread as the ice-cream crank. By 
screwing the part into the crank and 
sticking the other end into the Kitchen­
Aid, I can drive the freezer at the speed of 
my choice. 
-Stephen A. Smith, 
Concord, MA 
Cooking Chicken 
Breasts Evenly 
Because boneless chicken breasts aren't 
evenly shaped-the broad end is much 
thicker than the tapered end-they 
don't always cook evenly. I like to coax 
them into uniform cooking by making 
two cuts into the thick end of the 
breast, about 1 to 1 Yz inches deep. This 
technique works especially well for 
sauteing, but it's fine when baking 
chicken breasts, too. 
-Marilyn Same, 
Sierra Vista, AZ 
Two Shortcuts for 
Creme Caramel 
In Fine Cooking #8, there was an ex­
cellent article on making classic creme 
caramel, or flan. I love the dessert, but 
I don't always feel like fussing with the 
caramelized sugar syrup, which requires 
constant stirring and close watching. I've 
found two excellent shortcuts that elim­
inate the caramelized sugar. 
The first variation is my favorite. In­
stead of coating the bottom of each cup 
or mold with caramelized sugar, I use a 
tablespoon of real maple syrup. 
Another shortcut is to pack a table­
spoon of brown sugar into the bottom of 
each cup. It melts during baking and pro­
vides a lovely brown "caramel sauce." 
-Russ Shumaker 
Richmond, VA • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 23 ---
T
H
E
 Y O U N G 
C H 
E F S
O
N U M B 
E R 
S E
V
E
 N 
I N 
A 
S E R I 
E S. 
"I love the flavor butter brings to my cooking!' 
Chef Gale Gand, Trio, Evanston, IL 
"I can't imagine cooking without it. 
Real dairy butter turns spinach pasta into 
sensational pasta. Here's what I do. I start with 
sliced fresh tomatoes and then add asparagus, 
carrots and zucchini. Or simply add your own 
favorite vegetables to the tomatoes. In the 
pan, the butter warms everything, mixes with 
their juices and creates a delicious pasta sauce. 
It couldn't be easier. Try it yourself at home." 
NOTHING BRINGS OUT THE TASTE LIKE REAL 
©1995 America's Dairy Farmers

--- Page 24 ---
Try classic potato 
salad with a twist. 
Cook the potatoes 
directly on the grill for 
a crisp-smoky note 
before dressing them 
with fresh herbs and 
vinaigrette.

--- Page 25 ---
SmokyESweet 
Grilled Vegetables 
Almost any vegetable 
tastes great hot off the fire. 
Try them in appetizers, side 
dishes, or with pasta as a 
main dish. 
BY MOLLY STEVENS 
If it weren't for outdoor grilling, we'd rarely eat 
dinner at our house during the summer. When 
daylight lasts well into the evening, it's almost 
impossible for me to come inside to the kitchen to 
cook. Besides, food always tastes better on the grill. 
Sometimes all I can manage is to brush some onion 
slices with oil and throw them on the fire. Other 
times, I'm more energetic-I'll grill an assortment 
of vegetables and make a colorful antipasto, or make 
mixed vegetable kebabs, which become a whole 
meal if! serve them with thick slices oflightly grilled 
country bread. I also like to grill vegetables to add to 
other ingredients, such as pasta, couscous, or rice. 
PICK YOUR FAVORITE PRODUCE; 
ALMOST ANY VEGETABLE WILL WORK 
There's wide room for improvisation when cooking 
vegetables on the grill-just pick what looks best 
in your garden or at the farmstand. Tender, quick­
cooking vegetables are the easiest to work with, and 
they yield the most satisfying results because you can 
be sure they'll cook thoroughly. Some of my favorites 
are bell peppers, eggplant, and mushrooms, but the 
real winner for me is any type of onion. Leeks develop 
wonderful pink colors and sweet flavors, baby onions 
lined up on a skewer explode and caramelize, and red 
Onion slices get skewered for security. The rings stay together 
so it's easier to turn the slices on the grill. 
onion rings tossed with olive oil and rosemary are a 
delicious accompaniment to grilled chicken. 
OIL YOUR VEG ETABLES FOR FlAVOR 
AND FUSS-FREE G RILLING 
Since vegetables are virtually fat-free, they need to be 
brushed with oil to prevent them from sticking to the 
grill. I like to use a good-quality olive oil, along with a 
handful of fresh thyme, rosemary, or oregano, and 
plenty of salt and freshly ground black pepper. A 
squeeze of lemon can add a bright note, too. Some­
times it's fun to combine an intense oil, such as toasted 
sesame or chile oil, with a neutral oil and throw in 
some minced garlic, ginger, chiles, or dried spices, such 
as ground cumin or coriander. But be careful not to 
overpower the vegetables with too much strong spice. 
I use three methods of coating vegetables with oil: 
• The simplest and neatest is to put the vegetables 
in a bowl, drizzle with oil, season, and toss to coat. 
• You can also put the vegetables on a tray and 
brush them lightly with oil that's already seasoned. 
• For long, thin vegetables, such as asparagus and 
scallions, pour a bit of oil into the palms of your 
25

--- Page 26 ---
TURN PLAIN 
GRILLED 
VEGETABLES 
INTO STAR 
DISHES 
While summer 
vegetables straight 
off the grill need no 
further fiddling, I 
often add accents 
to brighten flavors 
and make the simple 
vegetables feel like 
full-fledged main 
or side dishes. 
• Add a splash of 
balsamic vinegar and 
a few chopped chives. 
• Squeeze on some 
fresh lemon juice and 
sprinkle with a hand­
ful of chopped fresh 
herbs, such as parsley, 
tarragon, and basil. 
• Drizzle with super­
fruity extra-virgin 
olive oil or an oil 
infused with citrus, 
herbs, or chiles. 
• Dress with a 
loose pesta sauce 
of basil, olive oil, 
and Parmesan. 
• Serve with pun­
gent garlic mayon­
naise or olive paste. 
• Sprinkle with 
grated pecorino 
romano, Parmesan, 
or crumbled feta or 
goat cheese. 
• Top with toasted 
chopped walnuts and 
a bit of walnut oil. 
26 
hands and rub each stalk to lightly coat it. 
If I'm planning ahead, I let the vegetables mari­
nate in seasoned oil for a few hours before grilling. 
A WELL-PLACED SKEWER 
MAKES HANDLING MUCH EASIER 
Skewering vegetables in some manner makes it much 
easier to move them around and tum them on the 
grill. Also, small vegetables won't fall through the grill 
bars and into the fire if they're bound together on a 
skewer. Bamboo skewers are my favorites, since 
they're slender and don't make big holes in the vege­
tables, but you should first soak them in water for 
about 20 minutes to keep the tips from burning. 
When constructing kebabs, keep in mind the cook­
ing times of the different vegetables. I think it's best to 
put only one type of vegetable on each skewer and 
serve each person two or three small kebabs. For round 
vegetables, like button mushrooms or small onions, 
try inserting two thin parallel skewers so the vegetables 
won't spin when you tum them. A good tip for onion 
rounds is to insert a toothpick or short skewer through 
the center to keep the rings together during cooking. 
Grilling stuffed mushrooms is an unusual techniqu
e--a
nd the 
G RI LL POSITION MEAN S CONTROLLING 
results are unusually delicious. Serve the mushrooms alone as 
THE COOKING TIME 
an hors d'oeuvre or with mixed greens as a first course. 
Your fire should be medium hot; the coals should be 
covered with gray ash but still have a red glow. Cook 
vegetables over direct heat, but don't crowd them 
Vegetables go straight from the grill to the serving bowl in 
or they'll cook unevenly. You can use crowding to 
this hearty pasta recipe, with just a quick chop on the way. 
your advantage, however, if the vegetables are done 
too soon. Push them off to the side and bunch them 
together. This slows the cooking but keeps the vege­
tables moist and warm. 
VEG ETABLES ARE DONE WHEN THEY'RE 
TENDER AND LIGHTLY CHARRED 
Cooking times will vary quite a bit, depending on 
your grill, the weather, and the size of the vegetables, 
so you need to develop a good sense of when each 
one is done. Vegetables are cooked properly when 
they're soft enough to be pierced easily with a fork or 
the tip of a knife but they still have some "bite" to 
them. And of course you can always take something 
off the grill, blow on it to cool, and do a taste-test. 
While you want a little smoke and char to flavor 
the vegetables, it's easy to overchar them if the grill 
is too hot. This develops bitter flavors and also 
makes it difficult to cook the vegetables all the way 
through, since the heavy char creates a heat barrier. 
The most important thing about grilling any­
thing is to watch the grill closely. Each grill has its 
quirks, and every fire is slightly different. Only by 
careful tending and by responding to hot spots or 
flare-ups will you know the pleasure of a plateful of 
moist, smoky-sweet, warm-from-the-fire grilled 
vegetables-the perfect summer meal. 
FINE COOK I G

--- Page 27 ---
Grilled Potato Salad 
This salad is best made with truly new potatoes, but if 
you can't find the babies, use larger red-skinned pota­
toes: just blanch them first in boiling water for a few 
minutes until barely fork-tender. Serves four to six. 
3 small red onions (about 7 lb. total), cut into 'I2-inch rounds 
2 Tbs. olive oil, more as needed 
7 '12 lb. baby new potatoes, halved (unless tiny) 
2 tsp. fresh thyme leaves 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
lI., cup mixed chopped fresh herbs (choose from parsley, 
tarragon, dill, chervil, basil, chives) 
FOR THE VINAIGRETTE: 
7 tsp. Dijon mustard 
3 Tbs. white-wine vinegar 
6 Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil 
Skewer the onion rounds with toothpicks to secure them. 
Brush the onions with olive oil and toss the potatoes with 
more oil, thyme, salt, and pepper. If your potatoes are 
very small, slide them onto skewers. Grill over medium­
low heat for 15 to 20 min., turning occasionally, until 
browned on the outside and very tender inside. 
Meanwhile, whisk together the mustard, vinegar, salt, 
and pepper. Slowly whisk in the olive oil; taste and 
adjust seasonings. 
When the vegetables are done, remove the toothpicks 
and toss the onions and potatoes with the vinaigrette 
until coated, and then toss with the herbs. Taste and 
add more salt and pepper if necessary; serve warm. 
Grilled Mushrooms with 
Sage, Parmesan & Prosciutto 
Portobellos or large shiitakes are ideal for this recipe, 
but good-size button mushrooms will work just as well. 
Serves four to six as an appetizer. 
lI., cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 
3 oz. prosciutto, sliced and chopped fine 
7 tsp. minced fresh sage, or '12 tsp. crumbled dry sage 
e cup olive oil 
Juice of 7 lemon 
7 lb. small porto bello, large shiitake, or large button 
mushrooms (or a combination), stemmed and wiped clean 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
Mixed salad greens (optional) 
(Continued) 
Any grill is fine (as long as it's clean) 
You don't need any special equipment 
to grill vegetables-any grill will do. 
The most important thing is to be sure 
that your grill isn't caked with greasy 
buildup from previous barbecues, 
since vegetables easily pick up flavors. 
Hardwood charcoal produces the 
hottest fire and the cleanest flavor, 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
but briquettes or gas work fine, too. 
Smoking or flavor chips can be 
pleasant when used in moderation, 
but I generally reserve these for 
grilled meats and pOUltry. Branches 
of fresh herbs give off wonderful 
aromas on your patio, but they'll add 
little to the flavor of the vegetables 
themselves. Most vegetables are 
best grilled uncovered, but some of 
the slower-cooking ones, such as 
whole eggplant or larger potatoes, 
do best with a cover. A good pair of 
long tongs and a spatula are essential 
grilling tools. 
Turn grilled vegetables 
into a robust sauce for 
penne pasta. Grill the 
vegetables until tender 
and full-flavored, and 
then toss with fragrant 
herbs, olive oil, and 
cooked pasta. 
27

--- Page 28 ---
These slender 
eggplant are oiled, 
seasoned, and ready 
to be grilled. They'll be 
brushed with a sesame­
ginger glaze during 
cooking. All vegetables 
benefit from a light 
coot of oil, which 
both adds flavor and 
prevents them from 
sticking to the grill. 
28 
Combine the Parmesan, prosciutto, sage, and 2 Tbs. of 
the olive oil. Set aside. Combine the rest of the oil with 
the lemon juice and brush it on the mushrooms. Season 
them with salt and pepper. 
Put the mushrooms, gill side down, on the grill over 
medium heat. Turn after about 3 to 4 min. Grill another 
3 to 4 min. until the juices begin to run and the mush­
rooms begin to soften. Move the mushrooms to the side 
of the grill. Spoon some of the ParmeŲan mixture into 
each mushroom. Cover the grill and let the mushrooms 
cook slowly for another 4 to 5 min. until the cheese has 
melted slightly. Serve warm, alone as an hors d'oeuvre 
or on mixed greens as a first course. 
Japanese Eggplant 
with Sesame-Ginger Glaze 
Slender Japanese eggplant work beautifully for this 
recipe, and they don't need to be salted in advance to 
remove bitterness. If you can't find them, cut a regular 
eggplant into half-inch rounds, salt generously, and let 
sit in a colander for half an hour. Pat dry and continue 
with the recipe. Serves four to six. 
1 Tbs. rice-wine or cider vinegar 
1 Tbs. soy sauce 
1 Tbs. hoisin sauce (optional) 
3 Tbs. toasted sesame oil 
1 tsp. sugar 
2 tsp. minced fresh ginger 
3 cloves garlic, minced 
8 small Japanese eggplant (about 4 oz. each), halved 
lengthwise 
2 Tbs. oil 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
2 scallions, minced 
A guide to 
grilling vegetables 
Here's a guide to preparing your vegetables for the grill. 
The entries are ranked from quickest- to slowest-cooking. 
All vegetables should be brushed with a light coat of oil. 
QUICKEST COOKING TIMES 
Asparagus 
Trim off tough stems 
Bell pepper slices 
Core, seed, cut into strips 
Corn 
Peel back husk, remove silk, 
tie husk back together, soak 
in water 30 min.; or remove 
husk and silk entirely, brush 
with oil or butter, and grill 
directly 
Mushrooms 
Wipe clean and remove stem 
Onion slices 
Secure with toothpick 
Scallions 
Cut off root ends 
Zucchini and 
summer squash 
Slice lengthwise 
MODERATE COOKING TIMES 
Baby carrots 
Wash but don't peel 
Beets 
Scrub and cut into small 
wedges 
Eggplant 
Cut half-inch slices; for 
Japanese eggplant, slice 
lengthwise 
Fennel 
Remove feathery tops, peel 
fibrous strings, cut in wedges 
leeks 
Cut off root end, remove 
green and tough outer 
leaves, split in half length­
wise, rinse thoroughly; large 
leeks can be blanched for a 
few minutes first 
New potatoes 
Halve or quarter 
Whole bell peppers 
Grill until skin is charred, 
transfer to a bowl and cover 
until cool enough to 
handle, slip off skin 
LONGEST COOKING TIMES 
Artichokes 
Parboil before grilling 
Garlic heads 
Cut off top of head 
Whole eggplant 
Prick with fork 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 29 ---
Mix the vinegar, soy sauce, hoisin sauce, sesame oil, 
sugar, ginger, and garlic together in a small bowl. Brush 
the eggplant with oil and season with salt and pepper. 
Grill over medium heat, cut side down, about 5 min. Flip 
the eggplant and baste with some of the sesame-ginger 
glaze. Continue grilling until the flesh is quite soft and 
the eggplant is just starting to collapse. Remove from 
the grill and drizzle with more glaze. Top with the 
minced scallions and serve warm. 
Penne with Peppers, Fennel & Basil 
I don't bother peeling the peppers for this recipe be­
cause I like the way they retain their juices and some 
crunch, but if you like, slip off their charred skins before 
chopping. Serves six. 
l-2 cup olive oil, more as needed 
4 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and quartered 
1 head fennel, cut into 6 or 8 wedges 
1 lb. small zucchini, halved lengthwise 
6 Roma or 3 larger tomatoes, cored 
6 large scallions, trimmed to leave 3 inches green 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
6 slices crusty Italian bread, 1 inch thick 
2 cloves garlic, halved 
1 lb. penne pasta 
1 medium bunch fresh basil, leaves washed, dried, and sliced 
Juice of l-2 lemon 
\1 cup freshly grated Parmesan or ricotta salata cheese 
AUGU ST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil for the pasta. 
Lightly oil the vegetables and season with salt and 
pepper. Grill all the vegetables, turning occasionally, 
until soft and slightly charred (see chart opposite for 
cooking times). As the vegetables are done, transfer 
them to a cutting board, chop into chunks, and tip 
into a large bowl, including any juices. Keep warm. 
Meanwhile, lightly brush the bread with more olive oil 
and grill for a few minutes on each side. Rub with the 
cut garlic cloves. 
Boil the pasta until tender (this should take about 
1 0 min.), drain, and drizzle lightly with olive oil to pre­
vent sticking. Combine the pasta, vegetables, and basil 
in the bowl and toss to mix. Squeeze in some lemon 
juice, drizzle on a few more tablespoons of olive oil, and 
season to taste with salt and pepper. Toss again and 
serve with the grilled garlic bread and grated cheese 
on the side. 
Molly Stevens is a chef/instructor at the New England 
Culinary Institute in Essex, VemlOnt, and a contribut­
ing editor to Fine Cooking. She didn't learn about 
grilling at La Varenne cooking school in Paris, where 
she earned a grand diplome, but rather at her home in 
Vermont, where she makes every summer day last as 
long as possible. • 
Grilled eggplant with 
Asian seasonings 
makes an easy and 
appealing side dish. 
Slim Japanese egg­
plant isn't bitter, but 
you can use regular 
eggplant as long as it 
isn't too seedy. 
29

--- Page 30 ---
Savoring Summer 
Ambrosia has honey-sweet, deep­
orange flesh. A great taste, soft 
texture, and reliable quality has 
earned it a following in white­
tablecloth restaurants. 
The Santa Claus or Christmas 
melon is the one of the best of the 
winter keepers. Extremely juicy, the 
medium-crisp, pale-green flesh 
has a light sweetness that leaves 
a haunting finish reminiscent of 
a complex Riesling wine. 
30 
There are dozens of varieties of 
cantaloupe, surely America's 
favorite melon. Regardless of type, 
all "good" cantaloupes should have 
Iight- to medium-firm flesh that 
tastes as honey might if it were as 
thin as apple juice. 
Golden Rich is sweet, juicy, and 
firm with a flavor and texture akin 
to both an apple and a pear. These 
Asian-type melons are unusually 
small--<1bout the size and shape of 
a medium eggplant. 
Honeydew has reliably sweet 
and juicy flesh, and it keeps quite 
well for a thin-skinned melon. It 
can withstand being picked slightly 
underripe and shipped without 
damaging its taste and texture. 
A perfectly ripe Charentais has 
an ethereal taste that I can best 
describe as sweet, heavy perfume 
turned to fruit. Its flesh is so smooth 
and creamy that it can slip down 
your throat before you have a 
chance to bite, leaving just its 
fragrance behind. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 31 ---
Melons at their Best 
Casaba delivers an extraordinary 
melon flavor. With a hard rind to 
protect its soft, delicate ivory flesh, 
this melon keeps well into winter. 
Sweet-tasting orange-fleshed 
honeydew has a denser, smoother 
flesh than a green honeydew. Over­
all, this is a more delicate, less spicy 
melon than its namesake. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Marble White tastes like a super­
sweet Asian pear. It has a thin, 
smooth, white skin, and nearly 
translucent, crisp, ivory-white flesh. 
Ha Ogen (also called Haogen 
or Israel) is a standout with its 
green and gold banded rind. 
A bright gold color indicates that 
this sweet and spicy melon is 
at its peak of flavor. 
Try one of the dozens 
of varieties in a 
salsa, sorbet, or 
even a seafood 
. 
main course 
BY GEORGEANN E BRENNAN 
M elons have a reputation for be­
ing prolific breeders. One re­
sult of their promiscuity is that there are 
now countless varieties of melons that 
come in a huge range of sizes, colors, 
and flavors. The tiny Golden Rich 
weighs just three-quarters of a pound 
and fits easily into the palm of your 
hand, while Santa Claus melons can 
weigh as much as nine pounds. The 
opalescent, ivory-white flesh of a Marble 
White is a stark contrast to the dark­
orange fruit of an Ambrosia. Some 
melons are smooth and dense, others 
are slightly crisp. All this diversity is a 
good thing, because there are as many 
cultural and personal preferences for 
the fruits as there are varieties. 
Melons are popular all over the 
world, but exactly what constitutes a 
"good" melon isn't always a matter of 
agreement. Preferences in taste and tex­
ture differ from country to country, region 
to region, even person to person. In Asia, 
31

--- Page 32 ---
Cool contrast. Sweet 
chunks of melon 
provide a refreshing 
counterpoint to the 
spicy greens and 
warm red snapper 
(see recipe on p. 34). 
the predilection is for crisp, crunchy melons with 
a taste and texture similar to that of an Asian pear. 
Marble White melons are a favorite there. In the 
point of fermentation and the flesh meltingly soft. 
Others prefer firm-fleshed melons with sugars just 
peaking. Almost everyone will agree, though, that 
southern United States, the 
slippery-smooth, papaya-like 
flesh of the Old Time Tennessee 
makes it a melon of choice. 
The standard European can­
taloupe, Charentais, is charac­
terized by highly perfumed, 
dense, firm flesh, while the 
muskmelons and cantaloupes 
cherished in the United States 
have a quite different aroma­
less perfumed and more hon-
Melons of all kinds 
a good melon is a sweet melon, one 
in which the sugar content is fully 
developed. 
eyed-with crunchier flesh. 
have an affinity for 
tart, spicy flavors­
try chiles, black 
pepper, or citrus 
CHOOSING A RIPE MElON, BY 
TECHNOLOGY OR BY TOUCH 
In France, where consumers are 
keenly attuned to the sweetness 
of their beloved Charentais, some 
large packers use an instrument 
called a fructometer to assure cus-
To some people, good means extremely ripe: 
the sugars in the fruit developed almost to the 
tomers of sweet melons. A fruc­
tometer measures the percentage of sugar in 
degrees, called brix. A melon with a brix of 12 is 
considered to be sweet, but the score may go as

--- Page 33 ---
high as 1 8, with anything over 13 being excep­
tional. While on a visit to a melon-packing shed in 
southern France, I watched as a machine cut a 
minuscule cone from each melon as it passed by 
on a conveyor belt, read it for sugar content, re­
inserted the cone in the melon, dabbed it with wax 
to seal it, and then affixed a " 1 2 plus" sticker over 
the wax if the sugar content was 1 2 brix or higher. 
Those melons with a sticker were shunted in one 
direction, those without it in another. 
Most of us, however, have to choose our 
melons without the aid of a fructometer. To 
help you make the best choice, you need to know 
AUGUST/SEPTEM BE R 1995 
two main facts about the type of melon: 
• Is its rind thick and hard or thin? Cantaloupes, 
muskmelons,· and honeydews all have thin skins 
and are generally consumed shortly after harvest. 
Hard-rind melons, such as casaba or Santa Claus, 
are long keepers and may be stored for months 
under optimum conditions . 
• Is your melon a "slip" melon? A slip melon is 
one that, when ripe, pulls readily away from its stem, 
leaving a clean scar at the base of the melon. If 
picked before it's fully ripened, a slip melon will have 
a tear in the rind. Slip melons may have either thick 
or thin rinds. Nonslip melons (Charentais is one) 
Latin American 
flavors and textures 
are natural partners 
for melon. Here, crisp 
jfcama, dense papaya, 
lime, cilantro, and 
tangy cheese all 
enhance the melon's 
own flavor (see recipe 
onp. 34). 
33

--- Page 34 ---
must be cut from their vines. You'll find them in the 
market with a bit of the stem attached. 
Once you've purchased or harvested a ripe 
melon, refrigerate it until ready to eat. Some melons 
seem to be at their best when eaten near room tem­
perature, only slightly cool, since smell is part of 
taste perception and chilling retards the release of 
the fragrant, volatile oils. 
OPPOSITE FLAVORS ATTRACT 
Many people eat melons only for breakfast or 
occasionally add them to fruit salads, but melons 
are really quite versatile. They can be part of a main 
course, a savory salad, and of course for dessert. My 
one caveat for using melons in a recipe is to be sure 
the other ingredients enhance-never over­
power-the melon's true flavor. 
Melons of all kinds, from crisp Asian types to 
honeyed casabas, have an affinity for tart, spicy 
flavors such as salt, chiles and black pepper, citrus, 
vinegar, and alcohol. Melons are wonderful unac­
companied, but you can heighten their flavor by 
serving them with a sprinkling of salt or a squeeze 
oflemon or lime juice. Freshly ground dried chiles, 
such as pasilla or ancho, or chopped green chiles, 
like jalapenos, enhance the sweetness of melon. 
Consider too, the classic pairing of half a can­
taloupe filled with port, or the Italian custom of 
wrapping a thin slice of salty prosciutto around a 
sweet, perfumed melon wedge. 
Melon, Mint &: Watercress Salad 
with Salt-Cooked Snapper 
Fish cooked in salt doesn't taste salty, just well seasoned. 
The salt helps keep the fish moist and allows you to cook 
it without adding fat to the pan. Shrimp makes a good 
substitute for the snapper. Serves four as a first course. 
1 cup loosely packed fresh mint leaves 
2 cups loosely packed watercress leaves 
1 l-2 cups diced cantaloupe or other mixed melons 
1 tsp. kosher salt 
l-2 lb. red snapper fillet, cut into four pieces 
l-3 cup plus 1 Tbs. lemon juice 
l-2 tsp. sugar 
Divide the mint, watercress, and melon among four 
salad plates, reserving some watercress for a garnish. 
In a frying pan, sprinkle the salt evenly over the surface 
and heat over high heat until very hot. Add the snapper 
and cook about 1 min. Turn, add 3 Tbs. lemon juice, 
and cover the pan. Reduce heat to low and cook until 
the fish is lightly browned, about 2 min. longer. 
Dissolve the sugar in the remaining lemon juice. Divide 
the fish and pan juices among the plates and drizzle 
with the sweetened lemon juice. Garnish with the re­
served watercress and serve. 
Mexican Melon Salad 
You can also make a salsa version of this salad, called Pico 
di Gallo ("rooster's beak") by adding more lime juice and 
cutting the fruit into smaller pieces. The salsa makes a de­
licious accompaniment to grilled fish. Serves four. 
1 l-2 cups peeled and diced jicama (about half a large jicama) 
s cup diced very ripe papaya 
How to know a good melon 
when you see one 
Summer is the time for melons. 
The season's long days and warm 
nights are just the conditions 
needed to mature and ripen these 
luscious fruits. 
There are countless types to 
choose from-The Garden Seed 
Inventory, Third Edition, lists more 
than 150 varieties-and, since 
melons readily cross-pollinate 
and breeders continue to develop 
an ever-increasing number of 
hybrids, new types of melons 
appear all the time. 
Check your local farmer's 
34 
market-it's likely to be your 
best source for some of the more 
unusual varieties. Regardless of 
what kind of melon you choose 
to buy, there are some general 
rules to keep in mind: 
• Overall, a melon should 
be hard, with no soft spots. 
• A melon should be heavy for 
its size. Weigh a few that look 
about the same size and choose 
the heaviest one. 
• A ripe, good-quality hard­
skinned melon will give a hollow 
ring-not a dull thud-when 
knocked, and the skin should be 
fully colored. 
• When choosing thin-skinned 
melons, smell the scar at the 
base of the melon. The fragrance 
should be immediately noticeable, 
even if it's only faint. 
• If there is a slip-scar, it should 
be hard and show no evidence 
of mold, decay, or tearing. 
• If the melon is not a slip type, 
such as a Charentais, an ooze of 
sweet dew may be apparent at the 
stem, indicating ripeness. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 35 ---
1 jalapeno, cored, seeded, and minced 
1 tsp. minced dried chile, such as California or New Mexico, 
or 1 tsp. dried red pepper flakes 
14 cup lime juice 
14 tsp. salt 
1 oz. crumbled (eta cheese 
l-2 cup loosely packed cilantro leaves, chopped coarse 
8 thin wedges honeydew melon 
8 thin wedges orange-fleshed honeydew melon 
In a large bowl, combine the jicama, papaya, jalapeno, 
and minced chiles. Add the lime juice and salt; toss to 
coat. Crumble in the feta and add the cilantro. Divide 
the melon wedges among four plates and top with the 
jicama and papaya mixture. 
Melon Sorbet 
The distinct varietal taste of the melon is maintained in 
this sorbet, but a squeeze of lemon juice intensifies its 
natural sweetness. Each bite is an icy explosion of pure 
melon flavor. Yields about 7 quart. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
2 cups sugar 
1 cup water 
Exceptionally creamy 
and rich tasting, 
melon sorbets are 
superb (and fat-free.) 
4 cups coarsely chopped melon, such as honeydew, 
Ambrosia, or White Marble (about 3 lb. whole melons) 
1 Tbs. lemon juice 
In a small saucepan, cook the sugar and water, stirring 
often, until the sugar dissolves. Set aside to cool. 
In a food processor, combine 1 % cups of the cooled 
syrup with the chopped melon and lemon juice and 
blend to a coarse puree. Taste for sweetness and add 
the remaining % cup sugar syrup if necessary. 
Freeze in an ice-cream maker according to the manufac­
turer's instructions. Pack tightly into a l -qt. plastic con­
tainer, seal, and freeze until ready to serve. 
Georgeanne Brennan raises melons on her small farm 
in northern California. She is the author ofPotager: 
Fresh Garden Cooking in the French Style and 
The Glass Pantry: Preserving Seasonal Flavors 
(Chronicle Books, 1992 and 1994, respectively) . • 
FRESH WAYS 
WITH MElON 
• Scoop the seeds 
out of an Ambrosia 
melon and fill the cavity 
with strawberries that 
have been soaked in 
balsamic vinegar. 
• Fold bite-sized 
pieces of Charentais 
into vanilla-flavored 
whipped cream. 
• Dress chunks of 
honeydew with lime 
juice, lime zest, and 
coarse salt. 
• Fan slices of Marble 
White over a tart shell 
filled with almond­
flavored pastry cream 
and sprinkle the top 
with toasted coconut. 
• Puree cantaloupe 
with crushed ice and 
add a splash of rum to 
make a refreshing 
summer cooler. 
• Serve Santa Claus 
melon with slices of 
smoked duck and 
cucumber. 
• Combine pureed 
casaba with white wine 
and a bit of orange juice 
for a wonderful cold 
soup. Garnish with mint 
leaves and a dollop of 
sour cream. 
35

--- Page 36 ---
Salmon with Summer Vegetables offers relief from the kitchen on a hot summer night. The flavor of the 
salmon is enhanced if you poach it well ahead of time and store it in the cold court bouillon. 
36 
Poaching for 
Flavorful 
Cold Salmon 
Keeping fish moist and delicious is easy 
with a few simple techniques 
BY PAUL BERTOLLI 
I 'm happiest eating 
in the summer, not 
only for what these plentiful months bring 
to the markets and my garden, but also 
because warm weather lets me set my 
dinner table outdoors. Because waml days 
require relief from the muggy discomforts 
of a hot kitchen, chilled poached fish is a 
part of my summer repertoire. Light yet 
fully satisfying, it can be prepared with 
little time and fuss. With a few simple 
garnishes, fish poached whole or in slices 
adapts deliciously to meals for just a few 
people or menus for larger get-togethers 
and festive occasions.· Leftover poached 
fish also lends itself to any number of 
summer improvisations. 
RICH, FULL-FLAVORED SALMON 
IS A GOOD CHOICE FOR POACHING 
Of all the fish available for poaching, 
salmon is the classic choice not only for 
its appealing color, but also because the 
large and even "grain" of its flesh gives it 
a superb texture. The rich oils contained 
within salmon help to keep the fish moist. 
Salmon is particularly suitable to being 
served slightly chilled; its assertive flavor 
compensates for the muting effects of 
cooler temperatures. Nevertheless, you'll 
enjoy salmon's fullest flavor if you serve the 
fish just below room temperature. 
If possible, buy whole, unscaled salmon 
and poach it with the scales on. Scales pro­
vide an additional layer of protection and 
help keep the fish moist. Scales that are 
smooth and intact are also a sign that the 
salmon has not been treated roughly. 
USE GENTLE HEAT AN D AN 
AROMATIC LIQUID 
Keep in mind that poaching means cook­
ing not at a boil or even a simmer, but at a 
point just below a sinuner, around 180°F. 
With a little experience, you will be able to 
recognize this temperature level readily 
from the appearance of imminent move­
ment of the court bouillon and the lazy 
evaporation of the liquid at the surface. 
A court bouillon adds flavor. Perhaps 
the best way to prepare salmon that's to be 
eaten chilled is in a court bouillon (pro­
nounced koor bOO-YAHN) . The term 
comes from the French: court means short, 
and bouillon is derived from the verb "to 
boil." Court bouillon is "short" because it's 
made primarily of vegetables and herbs, 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 37 ---
Herbs, aromatic vegetables, and wine are the makings of a rich· tasting court bouillon. Wrapping a whole 
fish in cheesecloth protects the delicate flesh but lets the flavors in. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
which means it cooks much more quickly 
than stocks that are built from meat or 
poultry. Court bouillon is most often used 
as a poaching liquid for fish or shellfish, 
and sometimes for poultry or brains. 
Traditional recipes call for a fairly stan­
dard combination of ingredients-water, 
onion, carrot, thyme, bay leaf, and vinegar 
or wine (red or white, depending on what 
is to be cooked) are constants. A court 
bouillon destined for poaching fish should 
always contain a good amount of salt; 
without it, the fish will taste bland. Add 
about two tablespoons salt (I use kosher 
flaked salt) per quart of water. If you 
choose not to measure your ingredients 
each time, try at least to adjust the amount 
of salt so that the liquid is as salty as sea 
water. Add wine or vinegar only after the 
vegetables have cooked in the hot liquid 
for 12 to 15 minutes-the acidity of both 
of these ingredients inhibits the vegetables 
from cooking and releasing their flavor 
completely. Of course, fish is perfectly fine 
if poached in salt water alone. The sim­
plest addition is bay leaf, which I believe 
improves the flavor of any poached fish. 
Don't be shy with your seasonings. 
No matter how many aromatic ingredi­
ents you add, a court bouillon has only a 
soft influence on what's being cooked in 
it, so add plenty of herbs and vegetables. 
You can make a court bouillon that com­
plements and enhances the flavor of 
whatever fish you're cooking-just use 
your imagination . 
• Fennel is particularly harmonious with 
fish. I'm lucky enough to have wild fennel 
growing near my house, but if wild fennel 
Give your fish a handle for easy lifting in and out 
of the pot. After wrapping the fish in cheesecloth, 
tie a length of string just below the gill cover, at the 
tail, and in the middle of the fish. Loop another 
piece of string through each of these ties, leaving 
enough slack to act as a handle. 
37

--- Page 38 ---
isn't available, use the tough outer stalks 
and feathery tops of a fennel bulb. 
• Celery tops are welcome, as are the 
green parts of leeks or scallions. 
• I sometimes add parsley or other soft 
herbs, such as basil or tarragon, but I don't 
recommend chervil: its meek flavor would 
be lost in court bouillon. Avoid adding 
strong herbs, such as rosemary or sage: 
they can overpower the taste of the fish. 
The one exception is oregano, which is 
particularly good with striped sea bass. 
• Lemongrass has an exceptional aroma 
when infused in hot liquids and is very 
effective in penetrating fish, as are spear­
mint and lemon thyme. 
• Experiment with more exotic flavors, 
such as ginger or coriander. 
ADD SLICED FISH TO HOT LIQUID; 
BEGIN WHOLE FISH IN COLD 
The technique for poaching fish differs 
depending on whether it is whole or 
sliced. Obviously, slices of fish cook 
much more rapidly than the whole spec­
imen. Because of the shorter exposure to 
the court bouillon, the broth for cooking 
sliced fish should be simmered before 
adding the fish so that the maximum 
amount of flavor has been released from 
the vegetables and herbs. To do this, 
cook the vegetables in a little oil or butter 
over medium heat until they're soft be­
fore moistening them with water. Then 
add the herbs-hardy ones at the start, 
more delicate ones (that would other­
wise lose their bright scent) just before 
you add the fish. After the court bouil­
lon has developed a rich flavor, drop the 
sliced fish into the hot broth. If the sliced 
fish is put into cool broth and heated 
gradually, much of its flavor would escape 
into the surrounding liquid. Adding the 
fish to hot court bouillon helps to con­
centrate inside the slice all the flavor 
contained within it. 
An overnight soak allows the fish to 
absorb the full flavor of the court bouil­
lon. Traditionally, recipes for poaching 
whole fish call for preparing the court 
bouillon ahead of time and allowing it to 
cool before immersing the fish. My own 
method differs from tradition; I simply 
salt the cool water, add the raw aromatics 
and the fish, and slowly bring it all up to 
poaching temperature. Since whole fish 
is less permeable than sliced, loss of fla­
vor is not a concern. More important, af­
ter cooking, whole fish is returned to the 
cooled court bouillon and allowed to 
stand overnight. During this period, the 
fish has a chance to rest in its own re­
leased juices, as well as to absorb more 
thoroughly the aromas of the court bouil­
lon. Classic French cookbooks, such as 
Escoffier's, warn that immersion in boil­
ing court bouillon may cause a rapid 
shrinking and bursting of the flesh. You 
won't have this problem with salmon; 
nevertheless, keep this in mind when 
poaching more delicate types of fish. 
A whole fish is cooked when it reaches 
1 30° at its thickest point. The best way to 
test the fish without a lot of poking and 
prodding is to use an instant-read ther­
mometer. The fish should be removed 
right away to avoid overcooking. Now is 
when I add the wine to the broth. This 
keeps the wine much fresher tasting and 
reduces the temperature of the court 
bouillon, bringing it closer to the point 
when the fish may be replaced and stored. 
A whole salmon needs careful dressing 
1 Make a shallow incision around the gill cover, 
just in front of the tail, and all along the 
dorsal line from tail to head. Pull away any fins. 
38 
2 Lift away the skin, taking care not to pull off 
any of the flesh. Leave the skin intact on the 
underside, but trim any ragged edges. 
Whole Poached Salmon 
with Sauce Verte 
You can use smaller Coho salmon to make 
this dish, if you like; they usually weigh 
about three pounds. Just be sure to adjust 
the amount of the court bouillon and the 
sauce verte as well. Serves 12 to 15. 
7 whole unscaled salmon (about 6 lb.), 
wrapped in cheesecloth and tied with string 
72 qt. water 
7 l-2 cups kosher salt 
3 carrots (l-2 lb. total), sliced thin 
7 large leek (about l-2 lb.), sliced thin 
6 bay leaves 
7 bunch thyme 
7 bottle dry white wine 
FOR THE SAUCE VERTE: 
7 bunch fresh spinach (about 5 oz.), trimmed 
and washed 
2 egg yolks 
2 cups canola or vegetable oil 
7 l-2 tsp. kosher salt 
7 l-2 tsp. Champagne vinegar 
Fresh fine-ground black pepper 
2 Tbs. minced chives 
7 Tbs. minced fresh tarragon or basil 
7 Tbs. minced parsley 
2 Tbs. capers, drained and chopped 
To poach the salmon-Choose a pot big 
enough to hold the fish and fit it with a rack. 
Set the salmon on the rack. Add the water, 
salt, vegetables, and herbs. Do not add the 
wine. Over medium heat, bring the court 
bouillon to just below simmering (1 80°F). 
Keep it at this temperature until the salmon 
reaches 1 30° at its thickest point, about 
30 min. Transfer the salmon to a large 
plate or tray. Add the wine to the court 
bouillon and let cool to tepid. Return the 
salmon to the cooled court bouillon and 
refrigerate overnight. 
To make the sauce verte-In a large pot of 
boiling water, cook the spinach for 2 min. 
Drain and rinse the spinach with cold water. 
Squeeze the leaves to remove as much 
water as possible and chop the spinach 
very fine. 
3The grayish brown flesh just beneath the skin 
is perfectly edible, but the salmon will look 
more appetizing without it. Gently scrape it away. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 39 ---
Whole poached salmon makes a striking presentation. For the most flavorful fish, serve the salmon 
slightly cool rather than cold, straight from the refrigerator. 
Put the egg yolks in a l -qt. bowl and whisk 
to combine. Whisk in the oil very slowly in 
droplets, until the mixture begins to thicken. 
Add the remaining oil in a thin stream until 
it's well incorporated into the yolks. Add the 
salt, vinegar, and pepper to taste. Whisk in 
the spinach, herbs, and capers. The sauce 
should be soft but firm enough to hold its 
shape on the plate. If it's too thick, whisk 
in water, 1 Tbs. at a time, until thinned. Re­
frigerate the sauce verte at least 1 hour so 
the flavors can develop. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Remove the fish from the cold court bouil­
lon and set it on a large plate or tray. Re­
move the cheesecloth and reserve it with 
the court bouillon. Remove the skin (see 
instructions opposite). You may do this 
well ahead of time. If so, moisten the 
cheesecloth with the court bouillon and 
cover the fish. Discard the court bouillon. 
To serve, transfer the salmon to a large 
platter. Garnish with sprigs of watercress 
(or some of the same herbs used in the 
sauce verte) and slices of lemon. 
Remove the bones all at once after serving one 
side of the fish by simply lifting from the tail. 
Check the bottom fillet for any small bones you 
might have missed. 
Salmon with Summer 
Vegetables 
Tossing the vegetables with salt and leaving 
them to stand until they release their water 
concentrates their flavors. Serves four to six. 
FOR THE COURT BOUILLON: 
4!.? tsp. olive oil 
1 small onion, sliced 
1 large carrot, sliced 
1 rib celery, with leaves, sliced 
1 small bunch fresh thyme 
2 bay leaves 
2 qt. water 
lI., cup kosher salt 
2 cups dry white wine 
1 l1., lb. salmon fillet from the meaty head section 
of the fish, (about 1 inch thick at its thickest 
part), skinned, bones pulled 
FOR THE VEGETABLES: 
4 medium ripe tomatoes, cut in wedges 
2 fresh Anaheim chile peppers, cored, seeded, 
and sliced thin 
!.? large red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and 
sliced thin 
1 large cucumber, peeled, seeded, and sliced 
thin 
4 scallions, white part only, minced 
1 small shallot, sliced thin 
1 medium bulb fennel, cored and sliced thin 
lengthwise 
1 Tbs. kosher salt 
FOR THE DRESSING: 
2 cloves garlic 
12 anchovy fillets 
Juice of 1 lemon 
2 Tbs. red-wine vinegar 
!.? cup extra-virgin olive oil 
(Ingredient lis! continues) 
39

--- Page 40 ---
Fresh, ripe tomatoes and nifoise olives bring a pleasing acidity to this Sliced Salmon Salad, countering 
the richness of the fish. Blanched watercress dressed with lemon and olive oil is surprisingly delicious. 
FOR GARNISH AND PRESENTATION: 
72 to 75 fresh basil leaves 
Freshly ground black pepper 
4 handfuls arugula or mesclun salad 
2 eggs, covered with cold water, brought to 
a boil, covered with a lid, removed from 
the heat and left to stand for 8 min.; 
cooled under cold water, peeled, and cut 
into wedges 
To poach the fish-In a heavy-based pan, 
warm the olive oil over medium-high heat. 
Add the onion, carrot, celery, thyme, and bay 
leaves; cook until they release their perfume, 
8 to 1 0 min. Add the water and salt, bring to 
a boil, reduce to a simmer, and cook 12 to 
1 5 min. Add the wine. Bring the court bouil­
lon just below the simmering point (1 80°F), 
and add the salmon. The fish should be en­
tirely submerged; if not, add a little more 
water. Poach the fish for about 1 0 min. and 
then remove it from the court bouillon. Cut 
a slit in the salmon at its thickest point-it 
should be moist and a deep pink, but not 
rare. Bear in mind that the salmon will con­
tinue to cook slightly even after it has been 
removed from the bouillon. Transfer the 
salmon to a plate to cool. If time permits, 
poach the salmon several hours ahead, return 
it to the cooled court bouillon, and refriger-
40 
ate. Remove from the refrigerator about 
1 V2 hours before serving for the best flavor. 
To prepare the vegetables-In a large 
bowl, mix the vegetables and salt. Cover 
and let stand at room temperature for 
1 % hours. Transfer to a colander and drain 
well, pressing down slightly to extract as 
much water as possible. Cover the vege­
tables and refrigerate until ready to use. 
To make the dressing-With a mortar and 
pestle, pound the garlic. Add the anchovies 
and continue pounding until reduced to a 
paste. (Alternatively, mince the garlic and 
anchovies with a knife and use the side of 
the blade to smash them into a paste.) Trans­
fer the paste to a small bowl, add the lemon 
juice and vinegar, and whisk in the oil. 
To garnish and serve-Tear the basil leaves 
and add them to the salted vegetables. Add 
about half the dressing to these vegetables, 
season to taste with pepper, and mix well. 
Break the salmon into chunks and season 
with about 2 Tbs. of the dressing. Dress the 
arugula or mesclun salad with what remains. 
On a large platter, arrange the vegetables 
and top with the fish. Put the greens around 
the vegetables and garnish with the eggs. 
Evenly cut slices ensure evenly cooked fish. These 
bias-cut slices cook in only two minutes. 
Sliced Salmon Salad 
Poaching in the simplest of bouillons-salted 
water with bay leaf-accents the taste of the 
fish but does nothing to alter its essential 
flavor. Serves four. 
7 salmon fillet, about 7 lb. 
7 qt. water 
2 Tbs. kosher salt 
2 bay leaves 
FOR THE TOMATO-OLIVE GARNISH: 
4 small ripe tomatoes (about % lb. total), 
peeled, seeded, and diced 
l-2 cup pitted nifoise or other black olives 
7 small shallot, minced 
2 tsp. red-wine vinegar or lemon juice 
2 Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
7 Tbs. chopped fresh parsley 
FOR THE WATERCRESS SALAD: 
2 bunches fresh, tender watercress (about 70 oz.) 
7 Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil 
7 tsp. fresh lemon juice 
To poach the fish-Cut the fillet in half 
lengthwise to yield two roughly rectangular 
pieces about 6 inches long and 2V2 inches 
wide. Remove any pin bones. Turn the fish 
so that the long side is in front of you and 
cut %-inch-thick slices on the bias. 
In a large frying pan, bring the water, salt, 
and bay leaves to a boil over high heat. Add 
the fish and poach for 2 min. Remove with a 
slotted spatula and set it on a plate lined with 
paper towels. Let stand at room temperature. 
To make the tomato-olive garnish-Com­
bine the tomatoes, olives, shallot, vinegar, 
and olive oil. Season to taste with salt and 
pepper. Stir in the chopped parsley. 
To make the watercress salad-In a large 
pot of boiling water, blanch the watercress. 
Refresh it under cold water and pat dry. Toss 
with the olive oil and lemon juice and sea­
son to taste with more salt and pepper. 
On a platter or plates, arrange a bed of water­
cress, lay the salmon on top, and spoon the 
tomato-olive mixture over all. 
Paul Bertolli is the cheflco-owner of Oliveto 
Restaurant in Berkeley, California, and a 
contributing editor to Fine Cooking . • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 41 ---
J 
Drying Your 
Garden's 
Harvest 
Turn summer's crop into colorful 
condiments for year )round use 
BY JANE SELOVER 
E very gardener is thrilled by an abundant 
harvest, but having a green thumb has its 
downside, too. What do you do with the surplus of 
lush fruits, fresh vegetables, and fragrant herbs? You 
do some easy and creative preserving by drying. 
That's what I do in my job at the food and wine cen­
ter of a California winery, where we have a five-acre 
organic garden. My summer days are spent finding 
ways to transform the great stuff from our garden into 
delicious, attractive, and interesting ingredients. 
Even size and lots of air are key to good drying. Here, fig wedges 
on a mesh drying rack have plenty of room for air circulation. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
We dry everything 
from delicate day 
lilies, which we grind 
to a powder for deco­
rating dessert plates, to 
big, fat Georgia Streak 
heirloom tomatoes, which 
we slice and dry until they're a 
leathery and incredibly sweet snack. 
LOSING WATER THROUGH DRYING 
MEANS GAINING FLAVOR AND SHELF LIFE 
Drying produces an amazing transformation in fresh 
fruits and vegetables. Colors deepen, textures get 
chewy (and sometimes brittle) , and flavors become 
intense and perfumy. The goal in drying is to remove 
enough water so that the environment becomes 
hostile to bacteria. Since many fruits are high in 
sugar and acid, partial dehydration will be enough to 
preserve them well. Lower-acid foods, like most 
vegetables, need complete dehydration. 
DRY OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR I N YOUR OVEN 
Your simplest choice of equipment is a nylon mesh 
screen set on a trestle in the full sun. The dis­
advantage of this method, however, is that your pro­
duce is subject to the whimsy of the weather, insects, 
and dust. 
I do a lot of volume drying (my staff and I dried 
200 pounds of just three varieties of tomatoes last 
summer), so I use a large dehydrator with spacious 
racks and a fan; it keeps the temperature constant 
and the air moving. You can use a small electric 
The shapes and 
colors of dried fruits 
can be as appealing 
as their flavors. Sliced 
persimmons display a 
star center, and figs 
show delicate shades 
of green. 
41

--- Page 42 ---
dehydrator, designed for home use, usually built with 
about a half-dozen racks (see sources at right) . 
Granted, if you're trying to keep up with a bumper 
crop of tomatoes you might fall behind, since drying 
does take time. 
You can also use your oven, but only if you can 
regulate the heat to very low. Too much heat can 
cause the ingredient to dry hard on the outside but 
still be moist on the inside, which can easily lead 
to spoilage. 
TH E METHOD IS READY, SH ... WAIT 
Start with only the most perfect, ripe ingredients; 
drying will intensify flavor, but not enough to make 
dull fruit delicious. First, rinse and dry the ingre­
dient. In most cases, you'll want to halve small 
items or slice larger ones about Y3 inch thick to 
speed drying and avoid mushy spots. Space the 
pieces generously on your drying rack and set 
it outside, in your dehydrator, or in the oven. 
Now wait. 
The timing varies depending on the temperature 
and humidity outdoors, your choice of equipment, 
and the water content of the ingredients. Sliced 
tomatoes dried outdoors, for example, may take 
between three and five days in dry, partly sunny 
weather. In a home electric dehydrator, tomatoes 
will be leathery in eight to twelve hours. The best 
recipe is experimentation. Get a good reference 
book (see sources at right) , read up, and then get to 
know the quirks of your specific conditions. 
Dry until chewy or crisp. The degree of dryness 
you need is also a function of what you plan to do 
with the ingredients. For items to eat out of hand as 
a snack, you want the ingredient to be dry enough to 
prevent decay but moist enough to have a good 
chewy texture. If you plan to grind your item into 
powder or to rehydrate it to use in cooked dishes, 
you should dry it until crisp, which will ensure a 
longer shelflife. 
Preserve your preserves with careful storage. 
How you're going to store your produce depends in 
part on how successful you were with drying it. The 
super-dry items can be stored at room temperature 
in a jar or a plastic bag, protected from light and 
dust. Partially dry items, like tomatoes or pears, 
should be stored in a plastic bag in the refrigerator 
or freezer just to be sure bacteria doesn't grow in 
the remaining moisture. Dried foods are so col­
lapsed that they don't take up much room, and this 
way you won't have any unhappy surprises when 
you open the cupboard to use some of your precious 
stock of dried persimmons. Storing dried ingredi­
ents in oil is a good technique, too, because the oil 
acts as a preservative and the dried ingredient fla­
vors the oil, but for safety's sake, keep these prod­
ucts refrigerated. 
42 
Fresh &: Dried Fruit Compote 
This recipe is from John Ash, head of Fetzer's Food & 
Wine Center. Try to include figs, pears, and peaches in 
the dried fruit mix. If your dried fruit pieces are too big, 
cut them into manageable chunks. This compote is in­
credible served barely warm with a spoonful of yogurt 
cheese or mascarpone. Yields about 7 quart. 
1 bottle dry white wine 
2 Tbs. lemon juice 
12 cup sugar 
1 cinnamon stick, 4 inches long 
1 bay leaf 
1 'l2 up. coriander seeds, lightly crushed 
1 tsp. whole black peppercorns 
'l2 lb. mixed dried fruit 
2 Tbs. dry sherry 
2 tsp. chopped candied ginger 
1 lb. fresh firm, ripe pears or apples (or a mix), peeled, cored, 
and cut in thick wedges 
2-inch strip pared lemon zest 
s cup fresh blueberries, raspberries, or cherries (or a mix) 
In a nonaluminum pan, simmer the wine, lemon juice, 
sugar, cinnamon, bay leaf, coriander seeds, and pepper­
corns for 1 5 min., covered. Strain, return to the pan, 
and add the dried fruit, sherry, and ginger. Simmer, 
covered, another 1 0 min. Add the pears or apples and 
zest, simmer until just tender, 3 to 5 min., and then 
cool. Carefully stir in the berries. Store, refrigerated, for 
up to 1 0 days. 
Enjoy the full range 
of fruit flavor in this 
compote made with 
dried and fresh fruit. 
SOURCES FOR 
DEHYDRATORS 
Chefs Catalog, 
321 5 Commercial 
Ave., Northbrook, IL 
60026-1 900; 
800/338-3232 
Fante's, 
1 006 S. 9th St., Phila­
delphia, PA 1 91 47; 
800/878-5557 
Real Goods, 
555 Leslie St., Ukiah, 
CA 95482-5507; 
800/762-7325 
BOOKS 
Putting Food By, 
by Janet Greene, et 
aI., Viking Press, 1 988. 
Fancy Pantry, 
by Helen Witty, Work­
man Press, 1 986. 
Stocking Up (3rd ed.), 
by Carol Hupping, 
S&S Trade, 1 990. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 43 ---
Get creative with 
dried fruits, herbs, 
and vegetables 
Once you're comfortable with the basic technique, you 
can make some wonderful condiments to use in your own 
cooking or to give as gifts. 
Tomatoes: 
• Dry until still pliable and eat 
as a snack just by the slice. 
• Pack dried slices in a clean glass 
jar, fill it with olive oil, and add a 
few sprigs of herbs and a few 
roasted garlic cloves; store in the 
refrigerator until needed. Use the 
oil-soaked dried tomatoes whole or 
cut-up on pastas, pizzas, and salads. 
• Chop pliable or rehydrated 
tomatoes and add as a boost to 
bread doughs, vinaigrettes, sauces, 
or pilafs. 
Turn simple dried 
ingredients into delicious 
condiments, such as a 
custom-blended chile 
powder or a savory 
tomato-bosil spread. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
• Puree softened tomatoes with 
herbs such as basil and oregano 
and a little olive oil to make a 
spread. 
Chiles: 
• String into a wreath or a graceful 
hanging ristra. 
• Rehydrate to use in moles and 
other spicy dishes. 
• Grind into custom chile powders 
• Add to bottles of oil or vinegar to 
infuse. 
Mushrooms: 
• Rehydrate to use, whole or 
sliced, in soups, stews, stir-fries, 
or pastas. 
• Infuse in water or stock to make 
a flavorful broth. 
• Rehydrate, mince, and blend 
with butter to top grilled fish or 
chicken. 
Use the subtle beauty 
of dried and powdered 
flowers as a plate deco­
ration. Red and pink rose 
petals and golden day 
lilies are pictured here. 
Edible flowers: 
• Use whole roses as decoration 
for dessert plates, even salads. 
• Grind into colorful powder to 
decorate plates (see above). 
• Store with sugar in a sealed 
container to perfume the sugar for 
use in pastries. 
Herbs: 
• Dry whole leaves to crumble 
into any type of recipe, especially 
bread doughs. 
• Dry leaves to make custom 
blends and herb rubs. 
Fruit: 
• Eat whole or sliced as a 
healthy snack. 
• Use as an accent in a variety of 
dishes-blend with fresh cheese, 
toss in chicken salads, add to 
stuffings for poultry and meat, 
accent ice creams and other 
desserts. 
• Poach in spiced syrup to make 
a compote (see recipe opposite). 
• Puree, spread in a thin layer, 
and make fruit leathers, with 
either a single type of fruit or 
a combination. 
Jane Selover traded New York City for California's Mendocino 
County a few years before she began work at Fetzer Valley 
Oaks Food & Wine Center in 1990, first as a cook and, since 
1993, as head of the drying and preserving program . • 
43

--- Page 44 ---
Classic Slow,Cooked 
Tomato Sauce 
For a thick, old-fashioned sauce with 
an intense tomato flavor, 
there's no substitute for time 
BY ELAYNE ROBERTSON DEMBY 
Proust had his madeleine, a bite of which 
brought back a flood of childhood memories. 
For me, it's tomato sauce. The aroma of it takes me 
back to my childhood, when it seemed there was 
always a pot of my grandmother's sauce simmering 
on the stove. Like my parents and grandparents and 
their parents before them, I have never bought 
tomato sauce in a jar. Instead, every year at sum­
mer's end, when my garden is overflowing with ripe 
tomatoes, I make as much sauce as I can and fill my 
house with the unmistakable perfume of tomatoes 
cooking on the stove. 
WHY SLOW-COOK? 
Many people disparage long-cooked tomato sauces 
in favor of quicker-cooking recipes, arguing that the 
sauce tastes fresher if the tomatoes aren't over­
cooked. But the two styles aren't mutually exclusive. 
Quick-cooked and slow-cooked tomato sauces are 
distinctly different, and each should be savored on 
its own terms. Like sun-dried or roasted tomatoes, 
slow-cooked tomato sauces have a deep, concen­
trated flavor. Long hours of cooking enhance the 
tomatoes' natural sugar and allow their water to 
evaporate, leaving behind a thick sauce with an 
intense tomato flavor. 
THE FRESHEST INGREDIENTS 
FOR THE BEST-TASTING SAUCE 
Don't bother to make sauce from fresh tomatoes un­
less they're perfectly ripe and fresh from the vine. 
Supermarket tomatoes are flavorless and bland, and 
a sauce made from them will taste the same. Tradi­
tionally, plum tomatoes are used for making sauce. 
Sometimes called "sauce tomatoes," they have a 
higher proportion of flesh to seed and are less watery, 
more meaty than regular slicing tomatoes. Because 
plum tomatoes have relatively few seeds, I never 
bother to seed them. Of course, if you have a surplus 
of ripe slicing tomatoes from your garden, by all 
means use them for sauce. Just be sure to remove all 
their seeds, or your sauce will be watery and bitter. 
A cast .. iron or aluminum saucepot is best 
In many Italian American families, 
seasoning would be ruined. 
My first "good" pots were 
Cast iron and aluminum 
one pot was traditionally set 
The pot had to be washed with 
stainless steel with copper 
distribute heat evenly, keeping 
aside for the exclusive purpose of 
great care so that hard-earned 
bottoms. Every time I made 
the sauce from burning during 
making sauce. Popular lore had it 
seasoning wasn't scrubbed away. 
tomato sauce, I found a scorched 
the long cooking process. 
that over time the pot became 
My relatives' saucepots were 
crust on the bottom of the pot. 
Stainless steel's inferior heat-
"seasoned," making for a better 
always heavyweight aluminum or 
Since I acquired an enameled 
conducting properties don't 
sauce. Nothing but tomato sauce 
cast iron with an enamel lining. 
cast-iron pot, I haven't scorched 
stand up to long hours on 
could be made in the pot or the 
Years ago I found out why. 
a batch. 
the stove. 
44 
FINE COOKING 
1 
iO 
.ͩ 2. § .<: 0..

--- Page 45 ---
When using fresh tomatoes, the first step is to 
remove their skins. Tomato skins are tough and, if 
left intact, can make your sauce unattractive as well as 
unpleasant to eat. If you have a food mill, simply pass 
the tomatoes through it. The mill will trap the skins 
and seeds and puree the pulp beautifully. Otherwise, 
see the instructions for peeling and seeding on p. 46. 
After the tomatoes are peeled, chop them coarse 
before pureeing them in a blender or food processor. 
If your tomatoes are less than perfect, use 
tomatoes from a can. There are many brands of 
canned tomatoes, but they're not all created equal. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Plum tomatoes imported from Italy are not neces­
sarily superior to domestic brands. Experiment to 
see which you prefer. Don't use canned pureed 
tomatoes: they'll change the taste of your sauce for 
the worse. Buy canned whole tomatoes, drain off 
some of the liquid, and puree them yourself. I use 
an immersion blender to puree the tomatoes right 
in the can. 
Your onions and garlic should be fresh, too. Don't 
substitute dehydrated onion flakes or jarred minced 
garlic. If the garlic is old and pithy, remove the green 
core, which can make your sauce taste bitter. 
Peak·of·the·season 
tomatoes make the 
best sauce, but with 
good·quality canned 
tomatoes, you can 
make great sauce 
all year round. 
45

--- Page 46 ---
Use a good olive oil, but not extra-virgin. The fla­
vor of expensive, first-pressed oil is lost when heated. 
FOR HERBS, FRESH ISN'T NECESSARilY BEST 
In my family, tomato sauce was always made with 
dried herbs. Unless I'm making a sauce where all 
the ingredients come from the garden, I prefer dried 
herbs, both because it's traditional and because, to 
my taste, dried herbs give the sauce better flavor. 
(Parsley is an exception, however; 
Always smell herbs, 
fresh parsley is always best.) Regard­
less of the season, I always use dried 
fresh or dried, before 
oregano. Its flavor is just too pallid 
when fresh. 
you use them. A 
strong aroma hints 
at a strong flavor. 
I find many store-bought "fresh" 
herbs actually taste rather bland. The 
longer they're away from the garden, 
the more their flavor fades. Smell 
your herbs, fresh or dried, before you 
use them. A strong aroma hints at a 
strong flavor. Dried herbs that have 
been kept on the shelf for longer than a year have 
probably lost their potency. Date bottles and throw 
out any that are older than one year. 
If you use dried herbs, add them at the beginning 
of the cooking process so their flavors can soften and 
perfume the sauce. The taste of fresh herbs is more 
fragile. Stir them in just before you remove the sauce 
from the stove, as cooking diminishes their flavor. 
SLOW SIMMERING: THE SECRET TO THE SAUCE 
Time is the key to a flavorful tomato sauce, and this 
applies to sauteing the onions as well. Cook the 
onions slowly over low heat and they'll be mild and 
sweet, a delicate complement to your sauce. Sauteed 
quickly over medium-high heat, the onions will 
have a more robust flavor and so will your tomato 
Peeling and seeding tomatoes 
sauce. But take care not to let the onion or garlic 
bum. Saute the onion first; then add the garlic and 
cook just until it releases its aroma before adding the 
remaining ingredients. 
Cook the sauce at a constant simmer-never let it 
boil. If your sauce insists on boiling no matter how low 
the heat, remove the pot from the stove and let it cool 
for 15 to 20 minutes before continuing the cooking. 
A sweeter sauce. There are three schools of 
thought on the acid balance of tomato sauce. Some 
people like an acidic-tasting sauce, while others like a 
sweet sauce with no trace of acidity. A third group 
seeks a balance between the two extremes. 
Jarred sauces in this country tend to be sweet; any 
acidity is cut by copious amounts of com syrup. Home 
cooks who like a sweet tomato sauce can add sugar to 
theirs. Since personal taste varies widely and so does 
the acidity of tomatoes (even between batches of the 
same canned variety) , there is no exact amount of 
sugar to add. Taste your sauce when it has finished 
cooking. If you find it too acidic, add sugar, one tea­
spoon at a time, until the flavor suits your taste. 
Determining just when the sauce has finished 
cooking is again a matter of taste. When you're 
happy with the flavor and consistency, consider it 
done. I cook my sauce until it's quite thick and re­
duced by at least one-third of its original volume; 
this can take 2 Y2, sometimes 3 Y2 hours. And of 
course the sauce freezes wonderfully, with little loss 
of flavor. The recipe is so simple that I make as 
much as I can when tomatoes are at their peak. A 
freezer full of fresh tomato sauce helps me make it 
through the winter. 
Elayne Robertson Demby, a food writer in Weston, 
Connecticut, is a new mother who's preparing to pass 
on her tomato sauce recipe to another generation. 
1 Coring. The first step in peeling 
tomatoes is to remove the cores 
and score an X in the bottom of 
each one. 
2 Blanching. Plunge the toma­
toes into boiling water. When 
the skins start to pull away, they're 
ready to peel. 
3 Peeling. Transfer the tomatoes 
to a cold-water bath to stop 
the cooking; then simply peel away 
the skins. 
4 Seeding. Halve the tomatoes 
and gently squeeze out the 
seeds. Coax out remaining seeds 
with your fingers. 
46 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 47 ---
Try the classic sauce, pure and simple, 
or one of a trio of variations 
Slow-cooked tomato sauce is delicious served on top 
of pasta without any adornment other than a dose of 
freshly grated Romano cheese, but it's also a terrific 
base for making other classic tomato sauces. 
All these variations make enough sauce 
for about 1 V2 pounds of pasta, enough 
to serve about eight people. 
Classic Fresh 
Tomato Sauce 
(Salsa di Pomodoro Fresco) 
Feelings about tomato sauce 
run strong among Neapolitans. 
I'm sure it would be impossible 
to find two who agree on the 
recipe. My recipe is much like 
the one I learned from my 
grandmother, although I've 
adjusted it over the years to 
suit my own taste and style 
of cooking. Yields 1 quart. 
3 Tbs. olive oil 
1 small yellow onion, sliced thin 
3 cloves garlic, minced 
y., cup red wine 
3 lb. fresh plum tomatoes, 
peeled and pureed 
(about 6 cups puree) 
2 tsp. dried oregano 
Salt 
3 Tbs. minced fresh 
basil 
y., cup minced fresh 
parsley 
Freshly ground black 
pepper 
In a large saucepan, heat the 
olive oil over medium-high 
heat. Saute the onion until it 
begins to wilt, about 5 min. 
Add the garlic and saute just 
until fragrant. Stir in the wine. 
Add the tomatoes, oregano, 
and V4 tsp. salt. 
Bring the sauce to a simmer, 
reduce the heat to low, and let 
cook until reduced by at least 
one-third, 2% to 3V2 hours. Stir 
occasionally, taking care that 
the sauce never boils. Stir in 
the basil and parsley. Taste for 
seasoning and add salt and 
pepper as needed. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Red Clam Sauce 
For a variation on the variation, 
add % cup drained capers at 
the same time you add the 
clams. 
1 qt. Classic Fresh Tomato Sauce 
(see recipe at left) 
4 lb. fresh littleneck clams (about 
30 clams), rinsed well 
In a large saucepan, bring the 
tomato sauce to a simmer. Add 
the clams, cover, and cook just 
until the clams open their shells, 
5 to 1 0 min. 
Puttanesca-Style Sauce 
Though the real puttanesca is 
actually a fast-cooking sauce, 
I like to make this version when 
I have some of my slow-cooked 
sauce in the freezer. 
3 Tbs. olive oil 
5 anchovy fillets, rinsed and 
chopped 
1 qt. Classic Fresh Tomato Sauce 
(see recipe at left) 
e cup drained capers 
l-2 cup pitted, chopped black olives 
l-2 tsp. red pepper flakes, more to 
taste 
In a large frying pan, heat the 
olive oil over medium heat. Add 
the anchovy fillets and cook, 
stirring, until they begin to dis­
solve. Add the tomato sauce 
and bring to a simmer. Stir in 
the capers, olives, and red 
pepper flakes and cook until 
heated through, 2 to 3 min. 
Tomato Sauce With 
Dried Porcinis 
Try serving this rich sauce over a 
mound of creamy polenta. 
2 oz. dried porcini mushrooms 
1 qt. Classic Fresh Tomato Sauce 
(see recipe at left) 
Cover the mushrooms with 
2 cups warm water and let soak 
until softened, about 45 min. 
Drain the mushrooms, reserving 
% cup of the mushroom soak­
ing water. Gently squeeze the 
mushrooms dry and chop 
them. Strain the reserved soak­
ing liquid through a coffee filter. 
In a large saucepan, combine 
the mushrooms, reserved mush­
room liquid, and the tomato 
sauce. Bring to a simmer and let 
cook until thick and not at all 
watery, 15 to 25 min . • 
47

--- Page 48 ---
Mix Flavors and Textures 
in Trip Ie, Layered 
Dessert Bars 
Dessert bars have a refined appeal when you cut them into precise, delicate squares. The 
chocolate cream cheese brownie (foreground) is topped with a shiny glaze. The chocolate 
nut bar is rich with almonds and walnuts. 
48 
These easy confections 
can be elegant, too 
BY PATRICIA ANN HEYMAN 
Dessert bars are my culinary lifesavers. As a 
pastry chef, I've been rescued many times by 
the stash I keep hidden away in my freezer, such as 
the day when a catering manager lost a reservation for 
a luncheon. I had only an hour to prepare dessert be­
fore the guests arrived; fortunately, I had my trusty 
parachute of dessert bars waiting in the freezer. While 
the cooks raced around the kitchen in a panic, I just 
arranged the bars into an elegant dessert buffet. 
Preparing dessert bars is like making cookies, only 
quicker, because you don't need to roll, spoon, or 
pipe each cookie separately. The ingredients are 
combined, spread into a pan, baked, and then cut. 
Although many cooks dismiss the dessert bar as too 
simple, I seek to elevate it to new heights. I've pre­
pared dessert bars both for elegant parties and for 
casual affairs when a quick, fork-free dessert was 
needed. At home, these bars allow me to offer my 
guests a choice of three or four different desserts 
without having to spend a whole day baking. 
LAYERS ADD DRAMA 
Dessert bars are not only delicious and easy to make, 
but they're great looking, too. I like bars that have sev­
eral different elements of flavor and texture. For ex­
ample, my brownie recipe (opposite) has a layer of 
chocolate cream cheese sandwiched between the 
more cakelike layers, with a thin coating of chocolate 
smoothed on top. The chocolate nut bars have a rich, 
buttery bottom crust with a topping of toasted nuts 
and chocolate. When cut into squares, these bars have 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 49 ---
a tricolored cross section-light brown on the bottom, 
dark brown in the middle, and a rich golden brown on 
top. It's an eye-catching cookie. 
ORDINARY INGREDIENTS 
MAKE EXTRAORDINARY BARS 
You probably already have all the ingredients you'll 
need to make an array of impressive dessert bars. All­
purpose flour, sugar, and eggs form the foundation of 
most dessert bars. Whether you use butter, margarine, 
or shortening is really a matter of personal preference. 
Although I prefer butter, you can get away with mar­
garine or shortening in the chocolate cream cheese 
brownies because the other rich ingredients will mask 
the delicate flavor of butter somewhat. But in a simpler 
recipe like my raspberry bars, butter is an important 
flavor component --Dne that would be conspicuously 
absent if margarine or shortening were substituted. 
SIMPLE EQUIPMENT, SIMPLE TECHNIQUE 
Dessert bars require very little equipment. A mixer 
makes creaming butter and sugar much easier. I use a 
food processor to quickly cut butter into a flour mix­
ture, but a pastry cutter or two knives will work just as 
well. You'll also need baking pans, and most recipes 
can be easily adjusted to fit any size pan that you have. 
The creaming method. Even if you don't bake 
frequently, you've probably followed a recipe that 
begins with directions to "cream the sugar and butter 
together." This simply means to beat them until they 
look fluffy. It's best to start with room-temperature 
butter so that it mixes easily with the sugar. Beat until 
the mixture is smooth, pale yellow, and the sugar 
granules are no longer obvious. Once this happens, 
you can slowly add eggs and liquids, and then the dry 
ingredients. Nuts or chocolate should be added at the 
very end. Always remember to mix the dry ingredi­
ents just until they're absorbed. Too much mixing 
after the flour is added can result in tough bars. 
CUTTING THE BARS REQUI RES PRECISION 
After the baked bars have cooled, they're ready to be 
cut. A neat, precise cutting job will ensure that your 
bars look as good as they taste. Take your time; the 
results will be worth it. 
Decide how you'll divide the bars and mark them 
before cutting. For instance, to divide a 9x 13-inch 
pan into "bite-and-a-half" sized squares, I first meas­
ure out eight evenly spaced notches along the long 
edge of the pan. Then I notch the shorter side with six 
evenly spaced marks. You can use a ruler, or you can 
simply make a mark at the center of the 13-inch side, 
divide each half into quarters, and again into eighths. 
Likewise, divide the 9-inch side into equal thirds and 
then into sixths. With this grid as your guide, you're 
ready to cut. Using this method, a 9x 1 3-inch pan 
yields 48 dainty desserts-enough for about 20 guests. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
A chef's knife is all you need to cut the bars neatly, 
but if it pulls or rips the bars, try a serrated knife. Al­
ways wipe the knife clean between cuts. If the bars are 
frosted or are gooey inside, chill the pan before cutting. 
The frosting should be cool enough so it doesn't cling 
to the knife, but not cold, or it will crack when sliced. 
Freezing for freshness. I prefer to pack my dessert 
bars into clean cookie tins and serve them within a 
day, but if you don't plan to serve them right away, it's 
best to freeze them. Almost any carefully wrapped 
dessert bar will freeze well. Simply layer the bars with 
plastic wrap when arranging them in the tins. (Foil 
pans will also work well.) The tin protects the bars 
from being smashed in the freezer, and the plastic 
helps keep the bars from sticking together. 
To create a presentation of dessert bars, I arrange 
them on platters while they're still frozen. They're 
much easier to arrange when frozen, and I can do this 
hours before a party begins. Bars can be stacked if they 
aren't sticky or frosted. I often create a pyramid on the 
platter and then fill the rest of the platter with con­
centric circles of bars in a single layer. This adds some 
height and variety to the display. If you're aware of the 
color and textural differences, you can use a variety of 
bars to create a beautiful and interesting platter. 
Chocolate Cream Cheese Brownies 
With three different chocolate layers, these brownies are 
intense. The cocoa in them beckons for tall glasses of 
milk. Yields about 48 bars. 
FOR THE FILLING: 
4 oz. (1 cup) chopped bittersweet or semisweet chocolate or 
chocolate chips 
li.! cup heavy cream 
!Q lb. cream cheese, room temperature 
1 egg 
2 tsp. flour 
FOR THE BROWNIE BATTER: 
9 0z. (18 Tbs.) unsalted butter, room temperature; more for 
buttering the pan 
1 !Q cups sugar 
5 eggs 
1 tsp. vanilla extract 
11I tsp. almond extract 
7 oz. (1 !Q cups) all-purpose flour 
2-?3 oz. (s cup) unsweetened cocoa powder 
li.! tsp. baking powder 
FOR THE ICING: 
Approximately 8 oz. bittersweet or semisweet chocolate, 
finely chopped (about 2 cups) 
For the filling-Slowly melt half the chopped chocolate 
and cream together in a microwave or a double boiler. 
Set aside to cool. In an electric mixer' fitted with a paddle 
attachment, beat the cream cheese and egg together 
until fluffy. Add the cooled chocolate mixture and mix 
well. Add the flour and the remaining chocolate and mix 
until incorporated. Chill the filling while you assemble 
the brownie batter. 
For the brownie batter-Heat the oven to 350°F. Butter 
a 9xl 3-inch pan (a standard Pyrex baking dish). Cream 
the butter and sugar in an electric mixer until fluffy. Add 
Cream cheese adds 
tang to chocolate in 
this filling for super­
dense chocolate 
brownies. 
Instant icing. 
Immediately after 
removing the brownies 
from the oven, the 
author covers them 
with finely chopped 
chocolate. After 
a few minutes, the 
chocolate is melted 
and ready to spread. 
49

--- Page 50 ---
TIPS FOR 
SUCCESSFUL 
DESSERT BARS 
• Always use room­
temperature butter 
when creaming 
with sugar. 
• Don't overmix the 
batter. After the flour 
has been added, mix 
only to incorporate­
too much mixing 
means tough bars. 
• Wait until the very 
end of the mixing 
process to add nuts 
and chocolate; this 
way, they'll be dis­
tributed more evenly 
throughout the bars. 
• Take your time 
when cutting the 
bars. Use a serrated 
knife and wipe it clean 
between each cut. 
50 
the eggs one at a time, making sure that each one is fully 
incorporated before adding another. Occasionally scrape 
down the sides of the bowl. Add the vanilla and almond 
extracts. Sift together the flour, cocoa, and baking pow­
der and gently blend them into the batter. 
To assemble-Using an offset metal spatula (like the one 
pictured at right), spread half the brownie batter into the 
prepared pan. Spread the filling over the batter. Spoon 
the remaining brownie batter over the filling and gently 
spread it into an even layer. Bake for 35 min., until a knife 
inserted into the center of the brownies comes out clean. 
For the icing-As soon as you remove the brownies 
from the oven, sprinkle about three-quarters of the 
chocolate on top. Let sit about 5 min., until the choco­
late has melted. Gently spread the soft chocolate into a 
thin, smooth layer. If it isn't enough chocolate, sprinkle 
a few more pieces on top and spread again, but be care­
ful not to make the icing too thick. 
Raspberry Bars 
The better the preserves you use, the better these bars will 
be. I like to use raspberry because it gives the bars lots of 
color as well as flavor, but you could use apricot preserves 
or even a bitter-orange marmalade. Yields about 48 bars. 
13 oz. (26 Tbs.) unsalted butter, room temperature 
12fJ cups sugar 
2 eggs 
1 lb. (3% cups) aI/-purpose flour 
1l-2 oz. (1 l-2 cups) chopped, toasted hazelnuts 
2 cups raspberry preserves 
Heat the oven to 350°. Butter a 9x1 3-inch pan. In an 
electric mixer, cream the butter and sugar until fluffy. 
Add the eggs one at a time, beating well after each addi­
tion. Add the flour and mix just enough to incorporate. 
Add the nuts and mix a little longer until just blended. 
Press about two-thirds of the mixture into the prepared 
pan. Spread with the raspberry preserves and then 
crumble the remaining dough on top. Bake for about 
1 hour, until the top is lightly browned. 
Chocolate Nut Bars 
As these bars bake, the chocolate in the topping bonds 
with the base, leaving three layers in the finished bars. This 
recipe works with any variety of nut. I like to use almonds 
and walnuts; hazelnuts are delicious, too. Yields about 
48 bars. 
FOR THE BASE: 
1 1 oz. (2l-2 cups) aI/-purpose flour 
l-2 cup sugar 
8 oz. (16 Tbs.) cold unsalted butter 
3 oz. (% cup) blanched, sliced, and toasted almonds 
FOR THE TOPPING: 
4 oz. (8 Tbs.) unsalted butter, room temperature 
8 oz. (1 packed cup) brown sugar 
2 eggs 
1 l-2 tsp. vanilla extract or 4l-2 tsp. bourbon 
y" cup aI/-purpose flour 
l-2 tsp. salt 
6 oz. (1 l-2 cups) chopped bittersweet chocolate or chocolate 
chips 
6 oz. (1 l-2 cups) chopped, toasted walnuts 
For the base-Heat the oven to 350°. Butter a 9x1 3-inch 
baking dish. In a food processor, combine the flour and 
Wet hands keep the dough from sticking. Here the author lays 
the foundation for a pan of buttery raspberry bars. 
Making dessert bars is as easy as spreading jam. When baked, 
these bars will have a colorful raspberry streak through them. 
Topping off the bars is a quick job when you use both hands to 
crumble the dough. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 51 ---
sugar. Cut the butter into 1 -inch pieces and put it on 
top of the flour mixture. Add the almonds and pulse to 
blend until the butter pieces are the size of a pea. Press 
the mixture into the buttered pan. Bake for 25 min., 
until the edges are beginning to color. 
For the topping-In an electric mixer, cream the butter 
and brown sugar until fluffy. Add the eggs one at a time, 
beating well after each addition. Add the vanilla and then 
beat in the flour and salt, occasionally scraping down the 
sides of the bowl. Add the chopped chocolate and nuts 
and mix just to incorporate. Spread the topping over the 
crust and bake for another 30 min., until the top is 
golden brown. The bars should be firm to the touch. 
Poppy Seed Bars 
If you love poppy seeds, this confection is for you. 
Yields about 48 bars. 
FOR THE FILLING: 
7 1 cups poppy seeds 
2 oz. (1 cup) blanched, sliced, and toasted almonds 
7 Tbs. grated lemon zest 
7 cup sugar 
* tsp. ground nutmeg 
?3 cup milk 
4 tsp. lemon juice 
2 oz. (4 Tbs.) unsalted butter 
FOR THE BASE AND TOPPING: 
9 oz. (2 cups) all-purpose flour 
3* oz. (7 cup) confectioners' sugar; more for dusting 
2 tsp. baking powder 
2 oz. (1 cup) blanched, sliced, and toasted almonds 
8 oz. (76 Tbs.) cold unsalted butter 
7 egg 
For the filling-Combine the poppy seeds, almonds, 
and lemon zest in a food processor and pulse until fine. 
Transfer the mixture to a saucepan and add the remain­
ing ingredients. Cook over medium heat, stirring often, 
until the mixture boils and thickens to a syrup, about 
1 0 min. Remove from the heat and let cool. 
For the base-Heat the oven to 350°. Butter a 9x1 3-inch 
pan. Combine the flour, confectioners' sugar, baking 
powder, and almonds in a food processor. Pulse to 
blend. Cut the butter into 1 -inch pieces and place it on 
top of the flour mixture. Pulse again until the butter 
pieces are the size of a pea. With the machine running, 
add the egg through the feed tube. Pulse until the 
dough forms a ball. If the blade lifts up, remove the 
dough and finish mixing by hand. 
To assemble-Pat half the dough into the buttered 
pan, flouring your hands if the dough sticks to them. 
Pour the cooled filling over the base. Crumble the re­
maining dough over the filling to create a topping. 
Bake for 50 to 60 min., until the topping is browned. 
Cool the bars and, if you like, dust them with confec­
tioners' sugar. 
Patricia Heyman is a pastry chef who teaches baking 
and pastry classes at]ef!erson College in Louisville, 
Kentucky. When she's not teaching, she's often baking 
her " bite-and-a-half" desserts for a local caterer. • 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Moist filling; crisp topping. These two dessert bars-poppy seed and raspberry­
are impressive, but easy to make. 
51

--- Page 52 ---
Start with really fresh 
garlic. Cutting off the 
slender tops of the 
heads to expose the 
individual cloves will 
help them develop a 
rich, caramel color 
during roasting. 
52 
Roasting 
Garlic 
Tames 
Its Fire 
Tum these pungent cloves 
into a mellow flavoring for 
spreads, sauces, and soups 
BY SUSAN ASANOVIC 
G arlic has built its reputation on its power­
fully pungent flavor, so you may not know 
that it has a softer side. Roasting tames the sting 
while creating deep, mellow flavors. Garlic becomes 
sweeter and richer, and it loses the aggressive bite of 
raw or quickly cooked cloves. 
Whole heads of roasted garlic make an outstand­
ing appetizer: the soft cloves slip out of their skins, 
and the caramelized pulp can be spread on warm 
slices of bread. Roasted garlic is also great stirred 
into vinaigrettes, sauces, and soups, or blended with 
chopped herbs and butter. A spoonful of roasted 
garlic puree can make the difference between a good 
dish and a great dish. 
USE ONLY THE FRESHEST GARLIC 
Perfectly fresh, rock-hard heads of garlic are essential. 
Soft, shriveled, or musty heads will taint your results. 
A little olive oil is needed for roasting, and a good, 
fruity one that can stand up to garlic's assertiveness is 
the natural choice. The olive oil needn't be extra­
virgin, but you should avoid oils that are labeled 
"light," as these are often light on flavor as well. 
FLOWERPOTS AND OTHER GARLIC ROASTERS 
Terra-cotta garlic roasters are becoming a popular 
kitchen accessory, and they're a neat way to roast 
garlic. The porous, unglazed terra cotta is first 
soaked in water so that, when heated, it adds a bit 
of steam to the roasting process. This helps seal in 
the garlic's natural moisture-keeping it soft and 
supple, but not soggy, as it roasts. This cookware may 
be cute, but it isn't required. I find these roasters a 
little difficult to manipulate in the oven, as they be­
come very hot and have no handles. If you love the 
look and feel of a terra- cotta roaster, try a small 
terra-cotta flowerpot instead. 
Flowerpots. A six-inch clay plant saucer with a 
high rim, covered by an inverted flowerpot, will hold 
four average heads of garlic. The clay should be un­
glazed and well washed. Before roasting, soak the 
pot and saucer for 15 minutes in clean, warm water. 
Ordinary roasting pans. A small, heavy, oven­
proof covered casserole or pot will also do the trick. 
Choose an earthenware, sandwiched-aluminum, or 
enameled-iron pan just large enough to accommo­
date the number of garlic heads you want to roast. 
Aluminum foil. A double sheet of heavy-duty alu­
minum foil, about 10 inches square for each head, is 
the most economical cookware for roasting garlic. 
This is also the winner for easy clean-up and handling, 
but the garlic doesn't brown quite as nicely. 
A MODERATE OVEN IS BEST, 
BUT THE ROASTING METHOD IS FlEXIBLE 
Oven temperatures and timing are flexible, so garlic 
can be conveniently roasted along with other foods 
when the oven is on. I find, however, that roasting 
garlic too quickly gives it an acrid taste. The garlic's 
taste and texture is best with longer, gentler roasting. 
Before roasting, cut off the top of each head­
the end that comes to a closed point-so that each 
clove is exposed. Rub the garlic heads liberally with 
olive oil, sprinkle with salt, and roast in a 350°F oven 
for 45 minutes. Garlic can be roasted without oil, 
but the outside becomes brittle and the pulp is much 
less unctuous. If you use terra cotta, the method is a 
bit different: first soak the cover for 1 5 minutes in 
warm water; don't heat the oven ahead; and in­
crease the roasting time by 10 to 15 minutes. Some 
cooks cover their garlic for three-quarters of the 
time and finish cooking it uncovered. This gives a 
softer, caramelized result, but you can roast garlic 
uncovered at low temperatures with excellent re­
sults and less fuss. 
Constant, even heat makes your oven the easiest 
place to roast garlic with consistent results, but there 
are other ways to get beautifully browned bulbs. 
The grill. Roasting garlic slowly over the dying 
embers of a grill will give your garlic terrific flavor, 
but it can be tricky. If the grill isn't covered or the 
heat isn't steady, you can wind up with a bulb that's 
half charred and half raw. But with a little practice, 
your garlic will come out smoky, soft, and utterly ir­
resistible. Just oil the outside of the bulbs and set 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 53 ---
them directly on the grill. Timing varies widely with 
grill heat and other variables, so watch the color of 
the garlic and give it an occasional squeeze to check 
for doneness. 
The microwave. Yes, it's fast, clean, and easy, but 
as with microwaving meat, there are compromises. 
Microwaved garlic lacks the succulence produced 
by slow, dry heat, and as with meat, you don't get 
that "roasted" flavor, nor the attractive caramel 
color. Rather, it remains white and tastes similar to 
steamed garlic. 
THE REWARDS OF ROASTING 
When done, the cloves will be golden and the head 
will feel soft. To remove the puree, carefully separate 
the cloves and squeeze out the pulp. Or serve the 
whole head, and let each person coax the puree out 
as they spread it on crusty bread for an appetizer. 
Each garlic head will yield about four tablespoons 
of puree. If you happen to have some roasted garlic 
left over, it won't be around for long: once you're 
used to having it on hand, you'll never understand 
how you lived without it. Squeeze out any unused 
cloves while the heads are still warm, pack them in 
a jar, seal, and refrigerate. It will keep this way for at 
least four days. Reheating whole heads doesn't work 
very well, as the garlic loses much of its flavor and 
can be difficult to separate from its papery husk. 
Susan Asanovic is a registered dietitian and a licensed 
nutritionist who loves to cook. She lives in Wilton, 
Connecticut, where her refrigerator is seldom without 
a stash of roasted garlic puree. • 
Warm cloves of roasted garlic slip easily out of their skins. With 
only a little bit of coaxing, they can then be spread on slices of 
warm crusty bread and served as an appetizer. 
MORE USES 
FOR ROASTED 
GARLIC 
The soft garlic paste 
that emerges after a 
slow, gentle roasting 
is certainly delicious, 
but this simple spread 
is just a starting point. 
• In soups. Because 
the cloves are so soft, 
they melt magically 
into pureed soups 
with only a little bit 
of stirring. 
• In sauces. Blend a 
tablespoon of roasted 
garlic with a table­
spoon of cold butter 
and a bit of fresh 
rosemary and swirl 
it into the pan juices 
of any roast to 
create a heady, 
aromatic sauce. 
• With chicken. 
Transform ordinary 
roasted chicken by 
rubbing a tablespoon 
of roasted garlic 
puree and some 
chopped fresh thyme 
under the breast skin 
before putting the 
bird in the oven. 
• In mayonnaise. 
Whisk a few crushed 
roasted garlic cloves 
into plain mayonnaise 
for a Mediterranean­
style aioli. 
Slow, gentle roasting 
yields the most succu­
lent cloves. And once 
you're used to having 
a few tablespoons of 
roasted garlic in the 
refrigerator, you'll 
never understand how 
you lived without it. 
53

--- Page 54 ---
Choosing a Beer to 
Complement Any Dish 
From Pilsner to porter, beer's vast range of flavor 
makes it an easy match for food 
BY MARTIN NACHEL 
Beer with dessert? It's 
not a mistake. A slice 
of rich chocolate cake 
tastes great with the 
full-bodied, malty 
flavors of a sweet stout.

--- Page 55 ---
B eing a home brewer and a certified 
beer judge has taught me a very 
important secret: beer has as many com­
plex and varied flavors as wine. And 
when it comes to choosing what to drink 
with a fine meal, a bottle of beer can be 
just as enjoyable as any wine. 
Recently, I've noticed the secret is out. 
The brewpub industry is booming, and 
many fine restaurants and bars are creating 
beer lists that rival those for their wines. 
Unfortunately, there's no popular wisdom 
on how to pair beer with food. Even novice 
wine drinkers have a simple "red-meat­
gets-red-wine" rule to follow, but no guide­
lines are commonly known for beer 
drinkers. Still, I can explain why beer is as 
worthy a choice as wine for matching with 
meals. Once you know the basics, you can 
choose the right beer for the right food. 
IWHITE" BEERS ARE LAGERS, 
"RED" BEERS ARE ALES 
It helps to think of beer not as the con­
tents of an aluminum can, but as any fer­
mented beverage brewed with a cereal 
grain. This technical definition includes 
sake, which we don't commonly think of 
as a beer. Just as wines can be classified as 
"red" or "white," so can beer. 
Lagers. The lager category is the white­
wine equivalent. It's generally lighter in 
body and color, with a narrower flavor 
profile and a wider audience. Lager in­
cludes bock and Pilsner styles. 
Ales. Darker, rounder, more robust and 
expressive, the ale category is the red­
wine equivalent. It usually appeals to 
those with an experienced palate. Ale in­
cludes stouts and wheat beers. 
DOZENS OF BEER STYlES 
FROM A FEW I NGREDIENTS 
Whether ale, lager, or sake, beer has four 
ingredients: 
Grain. Beer is usually made from bar­
ley, but it can also be made from wheat or, 
in the case of sake, from rice. When the 
grain is soaked, fermented, and dried, it 
becomes a malt and is used in beer-
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1 995 
making. Dark malt is produced by high 
drying temperatures; crystal malt by 
roasting still-moist grains until caramel­
ized; and pale malt by gentle roasting. 
dozens of beer styles. Each style has 
varying degrees of three characteristics: 
maltiness, body, and hoppiness. 
Hops. These are the flowers of a twin­
ing vine (Humulus lupulus) , and they 
release a bitter oil when boiled. The 
longer the hops are in the brew, the more 
"hoppy" the beer becomes. Well-hopped 
beers have a distinctive herbal taste. 
Maltiness comes from the grain, 
which contains malt sugar that converts 
into alcohol during fermentation of the 
beer. Any sugar that doesn't make the 
conversion is left behind as a residual 
sweetness and becomes what's described 
as "maltiness." Some grains, however, are 
highly roasted or don't contain much 
sugar. In these beers, the maltiness 
doesn't express itself as sweetness but as 
the intense flavor of the grain itself. 
There are many more malty-sweet beers 
than ones that are malty-dry. 
Water. The quality of the water has a 
great effect on the quality of the beer. 
Yeast. Just as in breadmaking, there 
are many different varieties or strains of 
yeast, each with its own character. The 
type of yeast determines if the beer is 
considered an ale or lager. 
These four ingredients add up to 
Body. How heavy or light the beer 
feels in the mouth is described as the 
It's hoppy and full .. bodied. What is it? 
Hap flawer 
Happy, malty, full-bodied . . . 
what does i t all mean? To 
discover what these flavor 
qualities mean to your mouth, 
pop open a few beers in the 
name of scientific experimen­
tation. Here's a list of the basic 
flavor elements, with a selec­
tion of readily available beers 
that deliciously illustrate 
each one. 
Malty. Imported German 
Oktoberfest beers and bocks 
are among the most widely 
available malty-sweet beers. 
There are relatively few malty­
dry beers, but Guinness Stout 
would be a good example. 
Hoppy. The Sierra Nevada 
and Pyramid ales have a 
strong "grassy" or herbal 
flavor from the hops. Both the 
herbal and bitter hop qualities 
can be found in Anchor's 
Liberty Ale and Samuel Adams 
Boston Lager. 
Light-bodied. These thin 
beers pour very much like 
water. American light lagers 
like Coors and "dry" beers 
such as Sapporo and Bud 
Dry are among the lightest­
bodied beers in the world. 
Full-bodied. When you 
pour these beers, you can 
see the heavy viscosity that 
translates to a creamy feeling 
in the mouth. Unfortunately, 
not many examples of these 
styles are widely distributed. 
Look for microbreweries 
that produce barley wine, 
Scotch ale, Russian imperial 
stout, doppelbock, and old 
ale beer styles. Imports in­
clude MacAndrew's Scotch 
Ale (Scotland) and Samuel 
Smith's Russian Imperial 
Stout (England). 
55

--- Page 56 ---
A guide to matching beer and food 
Beer expresses its flavors with 
a large number of taste elements: 
malty-sweet, malty-dry, and hoppy, 
which can be bitter, herbal, or both. 
These flavors can be found in beer 
of light, medium, or full body. 
These variants are expressed in 
dozens of beer styles, each with its 
own unique characteristics. 
The beer styles in the chart 
below are listed from sweetest to 
driest, with a description of body 
and suggested food pairings. 
HOW TO TRACK DOWN 
A GREAT BEER 
If you know of a liquor store that 
takes pride in its wine selection, 
you'll probably find that it carries a 
wide variety of high-quality beers, 
too. But even a small-town package 
store can carry a surprisingly good 
selection that ranges from barley­
wine ale to a honey-fermented 
porter. While some of these beers 
may be found near the aluminum 
12-packs, fine beers are sometimes 
displayed unrefrigerated. Beers sold 
in oversized bottles may even be 
found next to the wine. 
BEER IN YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD. 
Most food-worthy beers are im­
ported, but the microbrewery boom 
is a boon to the trailblazing beer en­
thusiast. Microbreweries are small, 
locally operated, and produce 
unique products, some of which 
are made in beer styles virtually un­
known in America ten years ago. If 
there's a microbrewery in your area, 
that may be the best place for you to 
start your search for great beer. 
READ THE LABEL. Most beer labels 
or cartons have all the information 
you need about the beer. Sometimes 
the key is in the product's name, 
56 
as when the brand contains words 
like "lager" or "stout." The label or 
carton's advertising copy is also help­
ful. Look for descriptive adjectives like 
"sweet," "fruity," or even "chocolate­
roasted coffee finish." 
FRESH IS USUAllY BEST. Good 
beer is not often a matter of vintage. 
Type of beer 
Flavor 
ALES 
Barley wine 
very malty 
Scotch ale 
very malty 
Sweet stout 
malty/mocha 
Old ale 
malty/hoppy 
Biere de garde 
malty 
Brown ale 
caramelly sweet 
Bitter 
mildly sweet 
Altbier 
malty/hoppy 
Wheat beer 
tangy/mildly malty 
Cream ale 
mildly sweet 
Belgian witbier 
fruity/spicy 
Pale ale 
fruity/malty 
Fruit Iambic 
fruity/acidic 
India Pale Ale 
toasty/malty/hoppy 
Porter 
chocolatey/coffee 
Dry stout 
burnt malt/astringent 
LAGERS 
Doppelbock 
chocolatey/malty 
Vienna 
malty 
Oktoberfest 
malty 
Bock 
malty 
Munich lager 
malty/hoppy 
Rauchbier 
smoky 
Steam beer 
toasty malt/hoppy 
Black beer 
lightly burnt malt 
Pilsner 
subtle malt/hoppy 
Light &: dry beers 
very mild malt 
The first 90 days are the best of a 
beer's life, but most remain quite 
drinkable for a year. A few beers 
behave like wine and improve with 
age. These include Thomas Hardy's 
Ale, Traquair House Ale, Belgian 
Trappist triple ales, and Belgian 
fruit Iambics. 
Body 
Great partner 
full 
fine chocolates 
full 
glazed ham 
full 
chocolate, baked goods 
full 
steak, organ meats 
medium 
herbed and spiced cheeses 
medium 
pOUltry, rich meats 
light 
poultry 
medium 
aged cheeses 
light 
delicate seafood 
light 
vegetable dishes 
light 
fruits, light pastries 
medium 
pork, lamb, assertive fish 
light 
desserts 
medium 
duck, rich meats 
medium 
oysters, cheese sauces 
medium 
oysters, rich chocolates 
full 
weisswurst 
full 
spicy food, sausages 
medium 
sausages, cured meats 
medium 
wursts, spicy food 
medium 
pasta, lamb, pork 
medium 
smoked ham, sausages 
medium 
beef, mild cheeses 
medium 
sharp cheese, coarse bread 
light 
fish, chicken 
light 
rice, sushi and sashimi 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 57 ---
beer's body; it's the result of how much 
malt sugar converted into alcohol. Full­
bodied beers have more residual sugar; 
lighter beers have less. 
Hoppiness is the result of how long the 
hops were boiled in the brew. Hops give 
the beer a dimension of pleasant, gentle 
bitterness, as well as flavor and aromatics. 
BEER, BEER EVERYWHERE-
WHICH ONE SHOULD I DRINK? 
When it comes to choosing the best beer 
for a meal, I've devised a chart (shown at 
left) that describes beers by their styles 
and flavors and suggests potential din­
ing partners. Once you understand the 
difference between, say, brown ale 
(sweet, malty, almost caramelly) and 
cream ale (very light in color and flavor) , 
you can begin to understand the wisdom 
behind specific beer-food matchings. 
Any food that wine can match, beer 
can match as well or better. With the 
enormous range of flavors that can be 
found in beer, it's easy to make a satisfy­
ing beer partner for almost any dish. 
Spicy food. Serve a medium-bodied 
lager, such as a bock beer, a Marzenbier, 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Every beer has its glass. Simple, 
straight-sided glasses are good for 
simple beers. Beers with more com­
plex flavors, however, deserve tulip­
shaped glasses, which help release 
the beer's aromas. 
A crisp wheat beer is 
ideal for fresh seafood. 
When you squeeze a 
lemon wedge over the 
crab legs, save some 
juice for the beer: it 
accents wheat beer's 
refreshing flavor. 
57

--- Page 58 ---
or a Vienna-style beer. All are substan­
tially malty and feel creamy. They're 
rather sweet and have good tongue­
coating capabilities, which helps them 
to extinguish any culinary flames. 
Mediterranean. Cuisine defined by 
olives and olive oil, garlic, herbs, citrus, 
and tangy cheeses needs the malty 
sweetness of a Munich lager. Pasta is 
easily paired with a well-balanced Mu­
nich pale lager. A slightly bitter, hoppy 
pale ale contrasts well with sweet, rich 
lamb. Crisp Pilsner beer is famous for 
pairing with fresh fish, and the intense, 
dry flavors of a porter stand up well to 
oysters, shellfish, and salt-cured fish. 
Indian. While this cuisine is occa­
sionally spicy, it should receive greater 
notice for its complex blends of herbs 
and spices. Indian curries demand light-
bodied premium lagers that won't over­
power the food's finesse. 
Asian. The Chinese and Japanese 
drink vast quantities of beer. For the 
Japanese, it's a welcome alternative to 
the potent sake that's regularly served at 
mealtime. Japan's principal beer style, 
lager, is very lightly hopped and closely 
resembles America's national brands. 
These beers are excellent for pairing with 
the delicate fresh (and often uncooked) 
seafood consumed throughout Japan. 
The Chinese have also adopted a 
Western style of beer, the Pilsner, as their 
own. Tsingtao (pronounced JING-DOW) is 
one of the few brews from the People's 
Republic available in the United States. 
Tsingtao complements Chinese food, 
whether Cantonese, Sichuan, or Man­
darin. Beers with mild hop bitterness and 
The art of pouring beer 
As an appreciative beer 
drinker, you'll want to pour 
beer properly in order to 
bring out its best character­
istics. To do it well, you need 
to pour vigorously; this builds 
a desirable head of foam and 
releases the beer's carbon­
dioxide gases, which lets the 
beer's fragrance reach your 
nose. A proper head is about 
an inch, or "two fingers," in 
depth above the liquid. 
The quality of the head 
tells you about the quality 
of the beer. If the bubbles are 
large, look "soapy," and dis­
sipate quickly, it's an inferior 
beer. Well-made beers have 
small, champagne-like 
bubbles and heads that can 
be described as dense, rocky, 
and tightly knit. The beer's 
proteins hold the head 
together and leave what's 
called "Belgian lace" on 
the sides of the glass. 
Start pouring straight down the middle of the 
glass. Be sure to let the beer flow strongly. 
Once the head begins forming, either slow the 
pour or tilt the glass slightly to slow the buildup. 
58 
some residual sweetness, like a Dort­
munder Export, also pair nicely. 
French. The home of haute cuisine is 
no place for timid beers. Biere de garde, 
a malty beer style the French invented, 
is a natural for the country's aged and 
herbed cheeses. Rich, earthy Belgian 
Trappist beers complement most red 
meats. For rich sauces, a mildly malty 
but sharply refreshing Saison is a per­
fect match. 
Continental cuisine. In the "beer 
belt" of the north-Germany, Austria, 
Switzerland, Luxembourg, Liechten­
stein, Poland, Slovakia, and the Czech 
Republic-the national cuisines were 
designed for beer. Strong, aged cheeses, 
pork, chicken, coarse breads, and the 
best of the wursts don't need any coax­
ing to find a liquid partner. Great pair­
ings include the venerable Altbier with 
cheese, a malty-hoppy Maibock with 
barbecued white meats, 
Munich 
Dunkel (dark) with pumpernickel and 
rye, and a malty Oktoberfest or Mar­
zenbier with most sausages. For a real 
treat, try a Bamberger Rauchbier 
(smoked beer) with smoked ham or 
smoked sausage. 
Dessert. The idea of having beer 
with dessert may seem radical, but if 
you enjoy wine with dessert, the transi­
tion to beer should be easy. Rather than 
trying to match sweet with sweet, try 
contrasting tastes. A double chocolate 
cake would match a dry Irish-style stout 
or a robust porter. A Belgian witbier 
spices any fruit-laced sweet. Strawberry 
shortcake pairs well with a pale bock, 
and a box of chocolates will disappear 
quickly with a bottle of framboise (rasp­
berry Iambic beer) . Perhaps best pf all, a 
pint of malty Scotch ale can be a dessert 
unto itself. 
Martin Nachel is an award-winning home­
brewer and a freelance writer on beer and 
brewing topics. Cofounder of the Brewers 
of South Suburbia, he makes and drinks 
beer in Orland Park, Illinois . • 
FI E COOKING

--- Page 59 ---
I f you consider meat-cutting the exclusive territory 
of professional butchers, you may be surprised to 
know that cutting your own custom steaks and roasts 
can be as easy as whisking up a vinaigrette. By cutting 
it yourself, you can be sure your meat is fresh, your 
steaks will be the right size and perfectly trimmed, and 
you'll save money-up to $2.50 a pound. For summer 
entertaining, when the grill is the place to be, cutting 
your own beef makes a lot of sense. 
As a professional meat cutter, I'll take you step by 
step through the process of cutting and trimming a 
beef tenderloin, using only a few basic tools. Whole 
tenderloins are usually available in plastic vacuum 
packs in the meat section of supermarkets, but if your 
store doesn't carry them, you can ask to have one 
ordered. You can make thin filet steaks for quick 
pan-frying, thicker steaks for grilling, and a luxurious 
tenderloin roast. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
YOUR TOOLS: TWO SHARP KNIVES 
To make your work efficient, you'll need two high­
quality knives (a butcher knife and a utility or boning 
knife; see sidebar on p. 60), a sharpening steel, a large 
cutting board, and an apron. 
Be very careful whenever you use knives. They 
should be sharp, and the best way to use them safely 
is to let them do the work for you. Don't force the 
knife through the meat. The knife should glide 
through the meat using only minimal pressure. 
STORING YOUR STEAKS AND ROASTS 
Any cut can be safely stored, tightly wrapped, in the 
refrigerator for up to three days. To freeze the meat, 
wrap pieces individually in waxed paper. Lay them 
flat on a baking sheet and freeze. When frozen, seal 
the packages in freezer bags. These can be stored for 
up to three months. 
59

--- Page 60 ---
KNIVES THAT 
MAKE THE CUT 
I like to use knives that 
have a curved profile 
because they do some 
of the work for me. 
When I pull the knife, 
the curved blade 
forces its way deeper 
into the meat and 
makes a dean slice. 
Knives with a straight 
back also work, but 
they take a little more 
pressure on your part. 
Never use a serrated 
edge to cut meat: the 
meat will be sawed 
and shredded instead 
of sliced. 
When you're working 
with any large piece 
of meat, you need a 
long carving knife to 
make the initial cuts. 
For trimming fat and 
other detail work 
where you don't need 
a lot of blade, an easy­
to-handle small utility 
knife is best. 
60 
TRIMMING A WHOLE TENDERLOIN ' 
Begin by opening the plastic bag, draining off any 
excess liquid, and placing the tenderloin on the cut­
ting board with the fat side facing up. 
1 Use a knife to cut tougher fat and sinew. The tech­
nique for removing fat is a matter of pulling and 
cutting. Start at the thinner end of the tenderloin. 
Hold the layer of fat and silver membrane taut, and 
slice it off with a boning knife. 
2 Use your fingers to pull off the soft fat. Peel and 
pull the soft and crumbly fat until most of it 
is removed. 
The tenderloin doesn't need to be fat-free when you 
start cutting steaks, but remove enough so that you 
have a clear view of the meat and of the place where 
you want to make your first cut. 
CUTTING A WHOLE TENDERLOIN 
The tenderloin can be cut into steaks (filet steaks and 
smaller filet mignons) and also into roasts, such as the 
classic Chateaubriand (a 5-inch roast cut from the 
center of the tenderloin) or a larger roast that needs 
trussing. Tenderloin is also excellent when cut into 
thin strips for stir-fries. 
1 Measure and then cut a steak. Before cutting any­
thing, use a ruler to measure your thumb from the 
tip of the nail down. Note where the V2., 3J4-, and 
1-inch marks are so you can use your thumb as a guide 
to cut your steaks consistently. For a filet steak, start 
at the tenderloin's thick end, measure off about an 
inch and slice through the meat, using a few clean 
strokes. Do not saw back and forth. Cut smaller filet 
mignons from the thin end of the tenderloin. 
2 Use your fingers for the final trim. Tenderloin 
steaks should have little fat on them. After cut­
ting, just pull away any remaining fat. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 61 ---
TURNING A TENDERLOIN INTO A ROAST 
The tenderloin can also provide a beautiful roast. 
And since you cut it yourself, its size is up to you. 
1 To make a large filet roast, cut off about six steaks 
from the thick end of the tenderloin. Trim any 
excess fat from the tenderloin and tuck the small 
end under to make an even roast. 
2 To truss the roast, tie several lengths of kitchen 
twine securely around the meat, spacing them 
about 1 Y2 inches apart. Roast at 450° until the in­
ternal temperature is about 135° for medium rare. 
Matthew Lust has all of his fingers and is a journey­
man meat cutter at the IGA in Lagrange, Ohio. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
How to cook a steak 
BY RICHARD CHAMBERLAIN 
When you've custom-cut your 
own steak, you want to cook it 
perfectly. I prepare 200 pounds of 
beef every day at my restaurant, 
and I know how to give good beef 
the treatment it deserves. 
CHOOSE YOUR METHOD TO 
SUIT THE SIZE OF THE STEAK 
Steaks from prime- or choice­
grade meat are tender. To retain 
moisture and flavor, tender meat 
needs the dry, intense heat of 
grilling, broiling, searing, or 
roasting. 
The steak's thickness deter­
mines how close the meat needs 
to be to the heat. You want to co­
ordinate a nicely seared surface 
with the right degree of doneness 
inside. Cook thin steaks very 
close to the heat; thick steaks, far­
ther away. For example, you 
wouldn't broil a 6-ounce filet: by 
the time the surface was seared, 
the inside would be overcooked. 
Pan-searing or roasting in a heavy 
skillet would be a better choice; 
these give the meat more contact 
with hot metal. Some cuts get the 
best results from a combination of 
cooking methods. 
Here are some sample cooking 
techniques and times; all produce 
a rare to medium-rare steak. 
• l 2-0UNCE FILET STEAK: 
Season the entire filet with salt 
and freshly ground pepper. Broil 
or grill it 4 inches from the flame. 
Cook each side for 3 minutes, and 
then tum again and cook each 
side for 2 minutes, for a total of 
10 minutes. Let it rest for 3 to 
5 minutes before serving to allow 
the juices to redistribute. 
• l O-OUNCE NEW YORK 
STRIP OR RIB-EYE: Heat a cast­
iron skillet until it's smoking 
hot. Season the steak on both 
sides with salt and freshly 
ground pepper. Sear the steak 
in the skillet for 1 Y2 minutes 
on each side. Don't use oil; the 
steak's fat will provide enough. 
Remove it from the pan and let 
it rest for 3 to 5 minutes before 
serving. 
• l 6-0UNCE NEW YORK 
STRIP OR RIB-EYE: Heat a grill 
until very hot and heat the oven 
to 4000E Season both sides of 
the steak heavily with salt and 
freshly ground pepper. Put the 
steak on the grill and cook it for 
four minutes on each side, turn­
ing once. Remove it, allow to 
rest for 10 minutes, and then 
put it in the hot oven for 4 min­
utes. Remove it, let it rest for 
3 to 5 minutes, slice, and serve. 
Chamberlain's 
Homemade Steak Sauce 
A good steak deserves a great sauce. 
I'd like to think this is one of them. 
Yields 7113 cups. 
1 Tbs. olive oil 
lI., cup chopped onion 
2 Tbs. honey 
lI., cup apple-cider vinegar 
lI., cup balsamic vinegar 
lI., cup soy sauce 
lI., cup Ruby Red grapefruit juice 
lI., cup beef broth 
lI., cup Worcestershire sauce 
3 Tbs. tomato paste 
2 tsp. powdered garlic 
2 Tbs. raisins 
1 1 tsp. black peppercorns 
s tsp. dried thyme 
1 tsp. salt 
Heat the olive oil in a large saucepan. 
Saute the onions over medium heat 
until soft. Add the honey and con­
tinue cooking for 2 min. Add the re­
maining ingredients. Bring to a boil 
and reduce the heat to medium low. 
Simmer for 1 hour, stirring occasion­
ally. Remove and cool. Puree in 
blender until smooth. Refrigerated, 
the sauce will keep indefinitely. 
Richard Chamberlain is the chefl 
owner of Chamberlain's Prime 
Chop House in Dallas, Texas. • 
61

--- Page 62 ---
A Mediterranean 
Feast of Many Dishes, 
Many Flavors 
The traditional mezze means 
"welcome" to a sumptuous meal 
of fresh tastes and textures 
BY LISSA DOUMANI 
A 
whiff of extra-virgin olive oil, the irresistible scent 
of onion and garlic, the fresh citrus allure of lemon juice. 
These are the fragrances that whet my appetite when I 
approach a mezze table-that spread of many savory dishes 
served in Lebanon, Greece, and other eastern Mediter* 
ranean countries. Smoky eggplant baba ghanouj, creamy 
hummus, and fresh herbal tabbouleh are a few mezze dishes 
you may know already. 
The mezze brings people together: it's served family* 
style, with many dishes spread across the table. Mezzes are 
perfect for parties or buffets. 
62 
MENU 
Tabbouleh 
(Parsley & cracked­
wheat salad) 
• 
Hummus 
(Chickpea & 
tahini puree) 
• 
Baba Ghanouj 
(Eggplant & 
tahini puree) 
• 
Foul Imdamis 
(Lebanese 
fava beans) 
• 
Loubieh Bziet 
(Green beans 
with onions) 
• 
Kibbeh 
(Minced lamb with 
cracked wheat) 
• 
Labne 
(Drained yogurt 
with mint) 
A mezze is a great way 
to entertain. Here, seven 
"do-ahead" dishes offer lots 
of fresh vegetables and fra­
grant herbs, earthy grains 
and beans, and just a touch 
of rich yogurt and lamb.

--- Page 63 ---


--- Page 64 ---
Tabbouleh 
is a parsley 
salad with 
a little 
cracked 
wheat, not 
a cracked­
wheat 
salad with 
a little 
parsley. 
Parsley, mint, tomato, 
and scallion make 
tabbouleh a bright 
contrast to earthier 
mezze dishes, such 
as smoky eggplant 
baba ghanouj. 
64 
MEZZES, LARGE OR SMALL, 
WORK WElL AT HOME 
When feasting on mezze in Lebanon, you can always 
tell how many courses are to come by counting the 
number of plates stacked in front of you. At home, 
just choose the dishes that suit your time and the 
number of diners. You don't need to go to extremes 
to enjoy a mezze. Some of the recipes are time ­
consuming to prepare, but many of them can be 
made the day before. Whether you serve one or two 
of these recipes as appetizers, or bring out all of 
them for a fuller mezze experience, you'll find that 
the delight of Lebanese cuisine translates easily into 
your own cooking style. 
Flavors of the mezze. While a mezze can be end­
less in variation, many of the dishes have common 
flavorings. Olive oil, lemon juice, garlic, allspice, 
and cinnamon are constants, as are fresh vege­
tables for scooping and dipping. A typical arrange­
ment is a whole head of romaine lettuce, standing 
upright with the leaves' tops cut off, surrounded 
by cucumbers, tomatoes, scallions, radishes, and 
carrots. Pita bread (another edible utensil) is al­
ways present, as is labne, which looks like cream 
cheese but is made from drained yogurt that's been 
lightly salted and flecked with fresh mint. Labne is 
delicious and seems to improve the flavor of any­
thing it accompanies. 
THE RIGHT WAY TO MAKE TABBOULEH 
A good tabbouleh is a parsley salad with a little 
cracked wheat, not a cracked-wheat salad with a 
little parsley. I don't know when Americans re­
versed these proportions, but I feel it's my duty to 
set the record straight. Tabbouleh should also have 
an amount of mint, scallion, and tomato equal to 
that of the parsley. Lightly dressed with good olive 
oil and lots of fresh lemon juice, this is a very green 
and refreshing salad. 
THE PLEASURE OF DIPPING IN 
One of the joys of eating at a mezze table is the tactile 
fun of plunging pita bread and vegetable slices into 
smooth, savory pastes. That's why hummus and baba 
ghanouj are two of the most frequently served dishes. 
Hummus couldn't be much easier to make. It's a 
puree of cooked chickpeas, tahini (sesame-seed paste; 
its consistency is similar to that of peanut butter) , 
lemon juice, and garlic. Whir it all in a food processor 
until very smooth, and you've got great hummus. 
The ingredients for baba ghanouj are almost 
identical to hummus-chickpeas are switched for 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 65 ---
eggplant-but the eggplant takes a bit more prepa­
ration than the chickpeas. 
Baba ghanouj is guaranteed to make a mess of 
your kitchen, but it's worth every spot. The egg­
plant is roasted or grilled whole, and the flesh is 
scooped out and mixed by hand with the other in­
gredients. Some recipes suggest roasting the egg­
plant in your oven, but this doesn't impart the best 
flavor. You need an open fire, which can come from 
the gas flame on a stove or from your backyard bar­
becue. In either case, the technique is the same. Lay 
the eggplant on the open flame, rotating it occa­
sionally. As the outside burns, the flesh becomes 
mushy. Carefully scrape away the skin from the pulp, 
removing all charred bits. 
SIMPLE BEANS BECOME EXOTIC DISHES 
One popular mezze dish has an unfortunate name­
foul. (Foul is pronounced FOOL; the word means 
"beans" in Lebanese.) The taste of foul imdamis, 
however, is nothing but delicious. It's very simple to 
make: saute onions and garlic in olive oil, simmer 
with beans, tomatoes, and spices, and finish with a 
generous drizzle of lemon juice and olive oil. 
The only tricky part of the recipe is finding the 
beans. They're often labeled as fava beans, but they 
aren't the fava beans commonly found in grocery 
stores. The beans you want are round, reddish brown, 
and little smaller than chickpeas. They're sold in Mid­
eastern groceries in cans labeled foul mudammas. 
The dish the Lebanese call 1oubieh bziet (LOO­
bee-ah be-ZET) means "green beans with onions," 
but that doesn't effectively convey how wonderful 
this dish is. The onions are sliced thin and cooked 
very slowly until they become browned and sweet. 
Green beans are added, the pot covered, and the 
whole thing cooked for 30 to 40 minutes. The result 
is a dish of meltingly soft beans and onions. Served 
hot, warm, or cold, and scooped with pita or your 
fingers, the combination is irresistible. Okra or 
'greens can be substituted for the beans, and some­
times tomatoes are added as well. 
KIBBEH, RAW OR COOKED-IT'S YOUR CHOICE 
My favorite mezze dish may be kibbeh. Kibbeh is 
minced lamb mixed with cracked wheat, and it's 
eaten both raw and cooked. I prefer kibbeh nayye 
(pronounced KIB-eh NAH-yee) , the equivalent of 
steak tartare. 
The process of making kibbeh is similar to that 
of making meatloaf. Essentially, you mix ground 
meat with seasonings. But since kibbeh is eaten raw, 
special care must be taken. You'll need two pounds 
of boneless leg of lamb. Ask your butcher to com­
pletely trim every bit of fat, tendon, and sinew from 
the meat. If your butcher can't oblige, you'll have to 
go through the process at home. The success of this 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
In Lebanon, mezze is a 
tradition of hospitality 
My family gave me an early introduction to the Middle East's mezze 
tradition, but it wasn't until I visited Lebanon last year that I experi­
enced a full-fledged mezze firsthand. While I had eaten many of these 
dishes when I was growing up, it wasn't the same as being presented 
with thirty dishes at one table-with a main course to follow! 
Eating and sharing of food with guests and strangers is an honored 
ritual in the Middle East. While the enormous quantities of a mezze 
may seem daunting, it is offered in the spirit of hospitality. Uninvited 
guests are common party fixtures, and the sheer volume of food saves 
hosts a lot of guesswork. 
dish is absolutely dependent on using perfectly lean, 
trimmed, fresh lamb. 
The meat must be ground fine, and either a food 
processor or a mixer with a meat grinder attachment 
will work well. If you use a meat grinder, put the 
meat through twice. If you use a food processor, chill 
the blade first and chop only small amounts at a 
time. Too much meat at once will make the machine 
work harder, which will warm up the lamb. It may 
become a puree instead of a fine grind. 
To assemble the kibbeh, add the cracked wheat, 
grated onion, and spices to the meat and mix with 
your hands. It's important to keep your hands cool as 
you mix the meat, so set a bowl of ice water at your 
side and dip in your hands occasionally. 
If you're not up to trying raw lamb, shape the 
kibbeh mixture into small patties and saute them 
slowly in clarified butter or olive oil. These are deli­
cious stuffed in pita and served with labne. 
Don't serve these 
green beans al dente. 
A good loubieh bziet 
depends on long 
cooking. The slowly 
sauteed onions and 
gently simmered green 
beans need a long 
time on the stove for 
the flavors to meld. 
65

--- Page 66 ---
How to serve many 
dishes at once 
The mezze is custom-made 
for party-giving. Here's a 
countdown to help you pre­
pare a mezze in advance. 
It's nice to take care of 
things ahead of time, but 
remember that the mezze is 
an inherently casual way of 
eating. Nothing is meant to 
be served piping hot, and 
the best temperature for 
most dishes is lukewarm. 
Nor are quantities meant to 
be a sure thing in Middle 
Eastern cooking. The yields 
for these recipes are much 
like the Lebanese attitudes 
toward hospitality-they 
will expand to fit. 
It isn't a meatloaf, 
it's kibbeh. This 
mixture of lamb and 
cracked wheat, lightly 
seasoned with cinna­
mon and allspice, can 
be served raw as 
shown, or shaped into 
small patties, fried, 
and stuffed into pita 
bread. 
66 
2 DAYS AHEAD 
• soak the chickpeas (if using dried) 
• make the hummus 
• order the lamb 
1 DAY AHEAD 
• make the labne 
• make the loubieh bziet 
• make the foul imdamis 
• pick up the lamb; give it a very 
thorough trim 
THE DAY OF THE MEZZE 
• make the baba ghanouj 
• make the tabbouleh 
• make the kibbeh 
1 TO 2 HOURS BEFORE SERVING 
• bring the hummus, foul imdamis, 
and loubieh bziet to room tem­
perature 
• cook the kibbeh (if not eating raw) 
• wash and trim the vegetables 
for dipping 
Tabbouleh 
(Parsley & cracked-wheat salad) 
It's important to chop the ingredients by hand; the food 
processor tends to make mush. Make sure the parsley is 
washed and dried well. If you're making this ahead of 
time, don't add the lemon juice until just before serving. 
Serves six to eight as part of a mezze. 
e cup fine-grind cracked wheat 
1 bunch (about 6) scallions, chopped fine 
3 cups finely chopped parsley leaves (flat-leaf preferred) 
ࢴ cup finely chopped fresh mint 
4 medium tomatoes, cored, seeded, and diced 
1 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
l4 cup fresh lemon juice 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
Soak the cracked wheat in warm water for about 30 min. 
Squeeze out the water and put the cracked wheat in a 
large bowl. 
Toss the scallions, parsley, and mint with the cracked 
wheat. Add the tomatoes, drizzle in the olive oil, and 
toss again. Add the lemon juice, salt, and pepper. Toss 
again and taste for seasoning. 
Hummus 
(Chickpea & tahini puree) 
This makes a wonderful dip for vegetables. Make sure 
the chickpeas are very tender. If the hummus is too thick, 
thin it with water. Serves six to eight as part of a mezze. 
One 19-oz. can chickpeas, or 1 cup dried chickpeas that 
have been soaked and cooked until very tender 
1 cup tahini (sesame-seed paste) 
1 clove garlic 
e cup fresh lemon juice 
Salt to taste 
Olive oil 
Cayenne 
If using canned chickpeas, drain them, reserving the 
liquid, and rinse them. If using dried, cooked chickpeas, 
drain them and reserve V2 cup of the cooking liquid. 
Puree all the ingredients in a food processor until very 
smooth, adding the reserved liquid as needed. You should 
have a medium-thick paste. Season with salt. Transfer the 
hummus to a shallow bowl, drizzle with olive oil, and 
sprinkle with cayenne. Serve with pita or raw vegetables. 
Baba Ghanouj 
(Eggplant & tahini puree) 
The most important part of this dish is roasting the egg­
plant. I do this on my gas stove, and it makes a mess, but 
the flavor can't be beat. Other options are on a grill, 
under a broiler, or in a hot oven. The oven is least prefer­
able because it can't give the eggplant the desired slightly 
charred flavor. Serves six to eight as part of a mezze. 
3 lb. eggplant 
1 tsp. minced garlic 
1 cup tahini (sesame-seed paste) 
2 Tbs. fresh lemon juice 
1 tsp. salt 
To roast the eggplant, set each eggplant directly on the 
flame, grill, or grate. (If you're using the oven, set a tray 
on the rack under the eggplant to catch any drips.) The 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 67 ---
eggplant will start to crack and give off juices; it should 
become an ashy gray-black. Turn it as it cooks, but be 
careful-as it softens under heat, it becomes difficult to 
move without splitting. When the eggplant is charred 
gray and very tender, transfer it to a plate to cool. 
Slice off the top of the cooled eggplant, and then cut it in 
half lengthwise. Use a spoon to carefully remove all the 
pulp, but avoid any bits of blackened skin. With a fork, stir 
the eggplant to break up large pieces and add the rest of 
the ingredients. Taste as you mix and adjust seasonings. 
Turn the baba ghanouj into a bowl and chill before serving. 
Foul l mdamis 
(Lebanese fava beans) 
Despite the recipe's name, these fava beans are nothing like 
the ones used in Western cooking. This addictive dish uses 
beans called foul mudammas, which are available in cans at 
Lebanese groceries. If you can't find them, chickpeas are 
the best substitute. Serves six to eight as part of a mezze. 
e cup olive oil 
4 medium onions, chopped 
2 cloves garlic, minced 
4 medium tomatoes, chopped 
Two 20-oz. cans foul mudammas, drained 
Y., tsp. ground cinnamon 
Y., tsp. ground cumin 
Y., tsp. ground ginger 
Y., tsp. cayenne 
Y., tsp. ground cardamom 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
Y., cup fresh lemon juice 
Heat a medium frying pan over medium heat until hot. 
Add % cup of the olive oil to the pan, wait about 30 sec­
onds, and then add the onions. Saute until the onions are 
translucent, about 5 min. Add the garlic and tomatoes 
and cook for 5 min. over medium heat. Add the beans 
and spices; cook for 1 5 min. over low heat, stirring occa­
sionally. Taste and adjust seasoning. 
Just before serving, stir in the lemon juice. Drizzle the 
remaining olive oil over the beans and serve with pita. 
Loubieh Bziet 
(Green beans with onions) 
This recipe also works well with okra, spinach, escarole, 
and chard. Tomatoes, fresh or canned, may also be added 
to the green beans. Serves six to eight as part of a mezze. 
Y., cup olive oil 
4 large onions, cut in half and sliced 'Is-in. thick 
2 lb. green beans, ends trimmed 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 
In a large frying pan, heat the olive oil over medium heat. 
When the oil is hot, add the onions. Saute for a few min­
utes, until the onions turn translucent. Reduce the heat to 
low and cook the onions for 20 to 25 min., stirring occa­
sionally. The onions should turn a rich caramel color. 
Rinse the beans in a colander; you want just a small 
amount of water to cling to them. Add the beans to the 
onions, stir, and cover the pan. Keep the heat low and 
cook for about 45 min., stirring occasionally. These beans 
are not served al dente; they should dull in color and be­
come limp. Season with salt and pepper and serve hot or 
at room temperature. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Kibbeh 
(Minced lamb with cracked wheat) 
I love raw kibbeh, but the cooked version is also excellent. 
I've included instructions for both. Serves six to eight as part 
ofa mezze. 
2 lb. boneless leg of lamb, every trace of fat, tendon, and 
sinew removed 
ࢳ cup fine-grind cracked wheat, soaked in warm water 
for 30 min. 
1 cup finely grated onion 
1 Tbs. ground cinnamon 
1 tsp. ground allspice 
1 1 tsp. salt 
1 tsp. cayenne 
(Recipe list continues) 
A quick whirl in the 
food processor gives 
you creamy, nutty 
hummus. Chickpeas, 
tahini (sesame paste), 
lemon, and garlic 
blend to make a 
nutritious dip for 
raw vegetables or 
pita bread. 
right on the burner. 
The skin will become 
an ashy gray-black 
(above). The process is 
messy, but the smoky­
sweet flavor and 
creamy texture of the 
finished dip (above 
left) make it worth the 
trouble. Use an out­
door grill or your 
broiler if you don't 
have a gas stove. 
67

--- Page 68 ---
Awkward name, 
delicious dish. Foul 
imdamis is a wonder­
ful mix of Lebanese 
fava beans, onions, 
garlic, and spices. The 
right beans are small, 
round, brownish fava 
beans that are avail­
able in cans labeled 
foul mudammas in 
most Middle Eastern 
grocery stores. 
SPECIAL 
TOUCHES 
THAT MAKE 
THE MEZZE 
If you'd like to turn a 
mezze into a full­
fledged party menu, 
there are a few 
accessories that will 
ensure you serve an 
unforgettable meal. 
• Start with arak, 
a strong, anise­
flavored liqueur. 
Serve it on the rocks, 
and watch your 
guests' reactions as 
the clear liquid turns 
milky white when it 
hits the ice. A good 
nonalcoholic option 
is a spritzer made 
frorn pomegranate 
syrup mixed with 
club soda. 
• For dessert, try 
serving baklava 
from a local Middle 
Eastern bakery with 
some fresh fruit. 
Flan and simple 
nut-studded butter 
cookies are also 
popular desserts 
in Lebanon. 
68 
FOR GARNISH: 
1 small red onion, cut into wedges 
Extra-virgin olive oil 
Cut the perfectly lean lamb meat into 2-inch cubes. Put 
the cubes in a bowl, cover with plastic, and refrigerate 
for about 30 min. 
Drain the wheat, squeeze out as much water as possible, 
and set aside. 
To grind the meat, use a meat grinder with a fine die or a 
food processor. If you use a grinder, put the meat 
through the die twice. If you use a food processor, chill 
the blade and chop only small amounts at a time. Be 
careful not to overwork the lamb or you'll make a puree. 
Fill a bowl with ice water and dip in your hands occa­
sionally to keep them cool as you mix the ingredients. 
Add the wheat, the grated onion, and all the spices to 
the ground meat. Mix as if preparing a meatloaf. Taste 
and adjust the seasonings. Smooth the kibbeh into a 
large ball, dipping your hands in the cold water as you 
work. Slide the kibbeh onto a plate and make a small 
well in the center of the meat. Cover with plastic and 
chill for at least 30 min. 
To serve, arrange sections of red onion, flower-petal 
fashion, around the kibbeh. Fill the well with olive oil and 
serve with pita. 
For cooked kibbeh-After you make the meat mixture, 
shape it into 2V2-inch patties that are the same thickness 
throughout. Over medium heat, slowly saute the kibbeh 
patties in clarified butter or olive oil. When cooked 
through, serve them as appetizers or stuffed in pita for 
sandwiches. Labne is an excellent accompaniment. 
Labne 
(Drained yogurt with mint) 
The yogurt takes all day to drain, but it's hands-off 
cooking-you don't even have to watch over it. 
Yields 1 Y2 cups. 
1 qt. plain yogurt, made without gelatin or thickeners 
1 tsp. salt 
y., cup finely chopped fresh mint 
Mix the yogurt and salt together. Line a colander with a 
double thickness of cheesecloth and set it over a bowl. 
Pour the yogurt into the cheesecloth, cover the colander 
tightly with plastic wrap, and refrigerate the colander 
and bowl for at least 8 hours. The longer the yogurt 
drains, the thicker (he labne will be. 
Remove the labne from the cheesecloth, turn it into a 
bowl, and return it to the refrigerator. Just before serving, 
stir in the mint. Serve in a shallow bowl with pita as an 
appetizer, or as part of a full mezze. 
Lissa Doumani owns Terra, a restaurant in St. Helena, 
California, with her husband, Hiro Sane. • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 69 ---
The Key to Smooth, Rich, 
Homemade Ice Cream 
An ice-cream pro 
shares his recipes and 
a secret ingredient­
skim milk powder 
BY ANDREW HINGSTON 
Super-rich, I'd-kill-for-another-spoonful ice 
cream usually comes in pint cartons, but it's also 
available in your home ice-cream maker. You may 
never have found it there, however, because most 
recipes don't include an ingredient that's guaranteed 
to make the difference between good and great ice 
cream. I made this discovery as a student at Penn 
State's Ice Cream School (the one that gave Ben & 
Jerry their start) , and I'll show you how to make ice 
cream that's extraordinary every time. 
MAKING GREAT ICE CREAM IS A SCIENCE 
People are passionate about ice cream, but the main 
ingredients that make it are pretty mundane: butterfat 
(from cream) , sugar, and water. These basic elements 
form an emulsion-a mixture in which particles of fat 
are dispersed in liquid. This ice-cream base is frozen 
while air is whipped into it during churning. 
lots of cream, however, doesn't necessarily 
mean great ice cream. While ice cream that's creamy 
and smooth should contain 14% to 20% butterfat, too 
much butterfat will make it stiff and greasy. 
You also need to use ingredients that will stabi­
lize the emulsion, keeping the fat well distributed 
for the creamiest confection. Egg yolks are the classic 
For deeply flavored caramel ice cream, add caramel sauce to 
the ice cream as it freezes. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995

--- Page 70 ---
Inspirations for flavoring ice cream 
Great ice creams need a practical formula, but flavor is an area where 
fantasies can take flight. Below is a list of flavors to get you started. 
Fresh Fruit 
Dried Fruit 
Candies & 
Nuts 
Spirits 
Bananas 
Apricots 
Confections 
Almonds 
Amaretto 
Blueberries 
Blueberries 
Chocolate chunks 
Brazil nuts 
Armagnac 
Cherries 
Cherries 
Heath bars 
Cashews 
Cointreau 
Mangoes 
Cranberries 
Peppermints 
Hazelnuts 
Creme de cassis 
Oranges 
Dates 
Brownies 
Pecans 
Creme de menthe 
Peaches 
Peaches 
Caramel sauce 
Walnuts 
Frangelico 
Raspberries 
Prunes 
Fudge sauce 
Kahlua or na Maria 
Strawberries 
Raisins 
ingredient for this. Eggs' protein helps hold the 
emulsion of fat and water together, and while egg 
yolks have a high fat content, that type of fat adds 
a pleasant richness and doesn't add to the butter­
fat. But egg yolks alone aren't enough of a stabiliz­
ing influence. 
WHY SKIM MilK POWDER 
IS IN THE BEST ICE CREAMS 
Skim milk powder is the key to the quality of all­
natural ice creams. Together with egg yolks, skim milk 
powder helps create ice cream that's smooth, dense, 
and rich. 
The protein in skim milk powder helps stabilize 
the emulsion without adding fat. It does this by ab­
sorbing most of the extra water in the ice-cream mix­
ture. Too little water gives ice cream a peculiarly 
sandy feel on the tongue, but too much unabsorbed 
water results in iciness. Instead of turning icy after 
two or three days in the freezer, ice cream that's made 
with skim milk powder should last a few weeks. 
Cocoa also absorbs excess water without adding 
fat; this is one of the reasons it's used instead of choc­
olate in many "chocolate" ice creams. Chocolate con­
tains a lot of cocoa butter, a fat that quickly hardens 
when chilled, which can create an ice cream that's 
difficult to scoop. But chocolate provides flavor that 
cocoa alone can't match. One solution is to use a 
small amount of the most intense chocolate you can 
70 
A thermometer 
shouldn't be optional 
equipment. Be certain 
that the custard has 
reached 765°F, not 
only to help ensure the 
recipe's success, but 
also to proted against 
salmonella contamina­
tion from the egg yolks. 
Rum or whiskey 
find, such as Callebaut or Valrh6na. Since imported 
chocolate can cost $20 a pound, I sometimes use un­
sweetened baker's chocolate and increase the sugar in 
the recipe. 
YOU HAVE TO COOK ICE CREAM 
BEFORE YOU CAN FREEZE IT 
The first step toward a great ice cream is to combine 
sugar, milk, cream, skim milk powder, and egg yolks 
and then cook the mixture to make a custard. Use a 
stainless-steel bowl set over a saucepan of simmering 
water so you can keep the heat low and constant. 
There are two measures of the custard's readiness: 
temperature and time. The custard should thicken 
noticeably as it cooks, though it should be very 
smooth. (Lumps would mean that it has gotten too 
hot and curdled.) Even more important, you should 
keep the custard between 165° and 180°F for at least 
10 to 15 minutes. Maintaining this temperature range 
is vital. Anything under 165° is too low to be effective, 
and even one degree above 180° can mean curdling. 
After cooking, cool the custard immediately in an 
ice bath until it reaches 65°. Not only does this heating 
and cooling procedure improve the ice cream's tex­
ture, it also comes as close as possible in a home en­
vironment to pasteurizing your mixture. Since egg 
yolks can contain salmonella bacteria, you should 
never skip these steps. 
When the custard has cooled, add any flavorings 
that contain alcohol, such as vanilla extract or a 
liqueur. This ensures that the alcohol won't evaporate 
in the custard's heat, leaving a little spirited kick. Re­
frigerate the mixture for at least four hours, preferably 
overnight, in a tightly covered plastic or stainless-steel 
container. This storage time improves the ice cream's 
texture and flavor, but make sure the custard isn't near 
any aromatic foods in your refrigerator. The custard 
can quickly pick up the flavors of garlic, onions, and 
spices. After the base has been refrigerated overnight, 
you should churn and freeze it that day. 
In this delicious ice 
cream, three powders 
make the difference: 
cocoa, espresso, and 
skim milk. The first two 
powders provide flavor, 
while the skim milk 
powder gives the ice 
cream its silky texture. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 71 ---
CHURN IT BY HAND OR BY MOTOR 
The world's best ice cream can be made in any kind of 
ice-cream maker. I currently use a Krups model, but 
since all models work pretty much the same way, I 
think the only real mistake you can make is choosing 
one that costs too much. 
Before you pour the custard into the ice-cream 
maker, be sure the machine is large enough to contain 
your batch; ice cream swells as it freezes. (My recipes 
are designed for a 1 liz-quart maker.) Freshly made ice 
cream will be soft. Once it has been churned, scoop it 
into a resealable plastic or stainless-steel container to 
harden in the freezer for a few hours. 
Keep ice cream as cold as possible. If you've ever 
opened a container of ice cream and found that it had 
become mysteriously gooey, your freezer was probably 
responsible. Frost-free freezers repeatedly warm and 
cool by a few degrees, which encourages the ice 
cream's water and fat molecules to separate and clump 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
with their own kind. That's why you shouldn't refreeze 
ice cream after it has been brought up to serving tem­
perature. The best solution is to eat homemade ice 
cream as soon as you can-but I don't think that will 
be a problem. 
Orange Ice Cream with 
Dried Cherries & Toasted Pecans 
Yields 1l-2 quarts. 
2 medium navel oranges 
2 cups heavy cream 
1 cup skim milk 
l-2 cup sugar 
l-2 cup light brown sugar, packed 
Large pinch salt 
ˠ cup skim milk powder 
5 large or 4 extra-large egg yolks 
l-2 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 
1 tsp. natural vanilla extract 
1 cup dried cherries 
ˠ cup orange juice 
21 Tbs. Cointreau or other orange liqueur 
* cup large pecan pieces 
Peel the oranges. Use a vegetable peeler to pare off the 
peel in thick, smooth strips. Turn the peel over so the 
white pith faces you. Scrape away the pith with the 
peeler or the edge of a sharp knife. Set the zest aside. 
Make the ice-cream base. Fill a medium saucepan half­
way with water and set it over medium heat. Combine 
the cream, milk, sugars, salt, skim milk powder, egg 
yolks, vanilla bean, and orange zest in a medium 
stainless-steel bowl and whisk to mix completely. 
Put the bowl on the saucepan and cook the mixture, stir­
ring constantly with a wooden spoon or spatula, until it 
reaches between 1 65° and 1 80°F. Test the temperature 
with a candy thermometer. Keep the temperature in that 
range for at least 10 to 1 5 min., still stirring. The mixture 
will thicken. 
Cool the ice-cream base. At the end of the cooking 
period, put the bowl in an ice bath to cool. Add the 
vanilla extract. Stir frequently, replenishing the ice 
as necessary, until the mixture cools to 65° (about 
1 5 min.). Cover the bowl and refrigerate for at least 
4 hours, preferably overnight. 
Plump the cherries and toast the pecans. Meanwhile, 
soak the dried cherries in the orange juice and Cointreau 
for a few hours until plump. 
Toast the pecans on a baking sheet in a 350° oven for 
about 10 min., shaking the sheet occasionally to pre­
vent burning. The nuts are ready when they color 
For a full· flavored 
mixture, infuse and 
then strain. The 
author simmers orange 
zest in the custard to 
release its fragrance 
and flavor. After the 
mixture chills, he 
strains out the zest and 
freezes the ice cream. 
71

--- Page 72 ---
slightly and become fragrant. Allow them to cool to 
room temperature. 
Freeze the ice cream. When you're ready to freeze the ice 
cream, pour the mixture through a sieve to remove the 
orange zest and vanilla bean. Add half the marinated cher­
ries and any excess liquid from the cherries. 
Begin freezing according to your ice-cream maker's 
directions. After 8 to 1 0 min., the ice cream should be 
semisolid-about the stiffness of cake batter. At this 
point, add the remaining cherries and the toasted 
pecans. Continue freezing until the ice cream holds stiff 
72 
Customize the recipe 
with fruits, nuts, and 
flavorings 
For some people, ice cream isn't worth eating if it 
doesn't have "chunks." These ingredients should be 
added about 8 to 1 0 minutes after the ice cream has 
begun freezing; at this point, the mixture will be thick 
enough to prevent the chunks from sinking to the 
bottom. Some additions need a little preparation before 
they can be added to the ice cream, and some ice­
cream bases need adjustment to accept the additions. 
FRESH AND DRIED FRUITS-Fruit contains a lot of 
water, which will always result in iciness. One solution is 
to use a little more cream and a little less milk in the 
base and to add a little extra skim milk powder to the 
mixture. You also can remove some of the fruit's water 
by partially dehydrating the fruit in a very low oven for 
an hour or two. While this diminishes the fruit's fresh 
flavor, it also prevents the chunks of fruit from turning 
into icy fruit pebbles in your ice cream. 
On the other hand, dried fruits such as raisins or 
dried cherries need some liquid before they can be 
added to ice cream. Plump them in fruit juice or a spirit 
(such as rum, brandy, or kirsch) for an hour or two. You 
won't need much liquid-perhaps two tablespoons for 
half a cup of dried fruit. 
NUTS-For the best flavor, nuts should be toasted 
before adding them to ice cream. Pistachios are trouble­
makers; they absorb a lot of water and quickly become 
soft in ice cream. 
ALCOHOL-Alcohol reduces the freezing point and 
makes ice cream easier to scoop. And of course there's 
the flavor alcohol can add-Chocolate-Triple Sec ice 
cream is one of my favorites. After you cool the custard 
base, try adding a tablespoon of alcohol for each pint 
of base. For stronger flavor, add two to three table­
spoons alcohol to the mixture as it cooks. The heat will 
cook out the some of the alcohol that would make the 
ice cream too soft. Still, that extra liquid means you'll 
need to add a little more skim milk powder (start with 
one teaspoon) to make up the difference. 
peaks. Transfer the ice cream to a resealable plastic or 
stainless-steel container and freeze overnight until firm. 
Caramel Ice Cream with 
Toasted Almonds 
Yields 1 generous quart. 
2 cups heavy cream 
1 cup skim milk 
1 cup light brown sugar, packed 
Large pinch salt 
!/., cup skim milk powder 
5 large or 4 extra-large egg yolks 
1 cup caramel sauce (see recipe at right) 
1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 
1 1 tsp. natural vanilla extract 
1 cup whole blanched almonds 
Make the ice-cream base. Fill a medium saucepan half­
way with water and set it over medium heat. Combine 
the cream, milk, brown sugar, salt, skim milk powder, 
and egg yolks in a stainless-steel bowl. Whisk to mix 
completely. 
Put the bowl on the saucepan and cook the mixture, 
stirring constantly, until the base reaches between 1 65° 
and 1 80°F. Test the temperature with a candy thermom­
eter. Keep the temperature in that range for 5 min. Add 
the caramel sauce and the split vanilla bean. Continue 
maintaining the temperature, stirring frequently, for 
another 5 to 1 0 min. The mixture will thicken. 
Cool the ice-cream base. At the end of the cooking 
period, put the bowl in an ice bath to cool. Add the 
vanilla extract. Stir frequently, replenishing the ice as 
necessary, until the mixture cools to 65° (about 
1 5 min.). Cover the bowl and refrigerate for at least 
4 hours, preferably overnight. 
Toast the almonds. Toast the almonds on a baking 
sheet in a 350° oven for about 1 0 min., shaking the 
sheet occasionally to prevent burning. The nuts are 
ready when they color slightly and become fragrant. 
Chop the almonds coarse and set aside. 
Freeze the ice cream. Remove the vanilla bean from the 
base. Freeze the base following your ice-cream maker's di­
rections. After 8 to 1 0 min., the ice cream should be semi­
solid-about the stiffness of cake batter. At this point, add 
the almonds. Continue freezing until the ice cream holds 
stiff peaks. Transfer the ice cream to a resealable plastic or 
stainless-steel container and freeze overnight. 
Hazelnut-Mocha Ice Cream 
Yields 1 generous quart. 
4 oz. good-quality semisweet chocolate, chopped 
1 v., cups heavy cream 
1 1 cups skim milk 
1 cup light brown sugar, packed 
5 large or 4 extra-large egg yolks 
l..J cup skim milk powder 
Large pinch salt 
1 Tbs. unsweetened cocoa powder 
2 Tbs. coffee powder (preferably espresso style) 
1 cup whole blanched hazelnuts 
1 tsp. natural vanilla extract 
1 1 Tbs. Frangelico 
Prepare the chocolate. Melt the chocolate slowly in a 
small bowl set over (not in) a pan of simmering water. 
This pale ice cream is 
intensely flavored. 
Triple-infused with the 
flavor of oranges (zest, 
juice, and Cointreau 
liqueur), the creami­
ness is memorably 
contrasted with 
toasted pecans and 
tart, chewy cherries. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 73 ---
Stir often. When melted, take it from the heat and set 
it aside. 
Make the ice-cream base. Fill a medium saucepan half­
way with water and set it over medium heat. Combine 
the cream, milk, brown sugar, egg yolks, skim milk 
powder, and salt in a stainless-steel bowl. Add the 
melted chocolate, cocoa powder, and coffee powder. 
Whisk to mix completely. Don't worry if the chocolate 
appears to "curdle"; it will smooth out. 
Put the bowl on the saucepan and cook the mixture, 
stirring constantly, until the base reaches between 
1 65° and 1 BO°F. Test the temperature with a candy 
thermometer. Keep the temperature in that range for 
1 0 to 1 5 min. The mixture will thicken. 
Cool the ice-cream base. At the end of the cooking 
period, put the bowl in an ice bath to cool. Add the 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
vanilla extract and the Frangelico. Stir frequently, re­
plenishing the ice as necessary, until the mixture cools to 
65° (about 1 5 min.). Cover the bowl and refrigerate for 
at least 4 hours, preferably overnight. 
Prepare the hazelnuts. Toast the hazelnuts on a baking 
sheet in a 350° oven for about 1 0 min., shaking the 
sheet occasionally to prevent burning. The nuts are 
ready when they color slightly and become fragrant. 
Chop the nuts coarse and set aside. 
Freeze the ice cream. Freeze the base according to your 
ice-cream maker's instructions. After B to 1 0 min., the ice 
cream should be semisolid-about the stiffness of cake 
batter. At this point, add the hazelnuts. Continue freezing 
until the ice cream holds stiff peaks. Transfer the ice cream 
to a resealable plastic or stainless-steel container and 
freeze overnight until firm. 
Caramel Sauce 
This is a great ice-cream topping, or use it to make 
Caramel Ice Cream with Toasted Almonds (see recipe 
at left). Yields 1 Y2 cups. 
1 cup sugar 
1 cup heavy cream 
Melt the sugar. Put the sugar in a heavy 3- or 4-qt. 
saucepan. Set the pan over medium-high heat until the 
sugar melts. Shake the pan occasionally to distribute 
the unmelted sugar, but do not stir; this can encourage 
lumps. When the sugar is melted and bubbly, continue 
cooking, shaking the pan occasionally. 
For a sweet caramel sauce, cook until the sugar turns 
light brown; for a richer, less-sweet sauce, let the 
caramel become medium or dark brown. (For more on 
caramelizing sugar, see Fine Cooking #1 , pp. 35-39.) 
Add the cream. As soon as the sugar reaches the cor­
rect color, remove the pan from the heat and begin 
whisking in the cream, about % cup at a time. Be ex­
tremely careful; the cream will make the caramel foam 
dramatically, and you can burn yourself on the steam 
or overflow. 
Cook the sauce. After all the cream has been added, 
return the sauce to a low flame for about a minute. If 
the sauce is too thick, whisk in more cream. While still 
warm, transfer the sauce to a Pyrex or stainless-steel 
container. Use it immediately, or let it cool to room 
temperature and rewarm it in a water bath or in 
the microwave. 
Andrew Hingston founded Hingston's Iced Cream in 
London. He lives in St. Helena, California. • 
Give hot caramel 
plenty of room. When 
you add cream to the 
hot sugar, the sauce 
will boil furiously. Hot 
caramel can burn ter­
ribly, so be sure your 
pot is large enough to 
contain the sauce. 
73

--- Page 74 ---
BASICS 
Here we offer quick "technique 
classes," so you can learn new skills 
or refresh the skills you already 
have, from choosing and handling 
raw ingredients, to using tools, to 
preparing basic recipes. 
Buying and 
Preparing 
Shrimp 
E
veryone, it seems, loves to eat shrimp, 
but cooks often steer clear of serving 
it at home. Shrimp has a reputation for be­
ing tedious to prepare, and, unless you're 
familiar with the sizes and grading system, 
buying shrimp can be confusing. 
Colossal, jumbo, large, and medium are 
familiar labels to shrimp lovers, but what 
most people don't understand is that these 
are not standardized sizes but simply 
marketing terms. Within the industry, 
shrimp is graded according to the number 
per pound, known as the weight count. For 
instance, if you order a pound of what is 
commonly called medium shrimp, you'll 
be buying 26 to 30 shrimp. Weight count is 
important because shrimp is sometimes 
mislabeled. Asking for it by count rather 
than size means you'll be assured of what 
you're buying. 
PEELING AND DEVEINING IS FAST 
IF YOU KNOW WHAT PART TO PULL 
Don't automatically peel shrimp without 
considering how you plan to prepare them. 
Shrimp cooked in their shell have more 
flavor, are juicier, and are less likely to 
PEELING SHRIMP 
Remove the rest of the shell by gently tugging 
on the very end of the shrimp's tail. 
be overcooked than shrimp that have been 
peeled. Although some diners may be 
squeamish about peeling shrimp at the 
table, seafood lovers will appreciate the 
extra flavor. Grilled shrimp particularly 
benefit from being cooked with their shells 
intact. But peeling shrimp before cooking 
SHRIMP SIZES, COMMON MARKET NAMES, AND USES 
Count per pound 
, Best use 
1 2 or fewer (colossal) 
Stuffing and grilling 
1 6 to 20 (jumbo) 
Appetizers, poaching, stuffing, and grilling 
21 to 25 (large) 
Appetizers, poaching, soups, pastas, and sautes 
26 to 30 (medium) 
Soups, pastas, and sautes 
41 to 50 (small) 
Same as for medium shrimp 
70 or more (salad or extra small) 
Mayonnaise-bound salads, or pureed for stuffing 
Editors' note: While many 
the number of shrimp per 
ment agency. Most reputable 
fish merchants post the weight 
count or will gladly tell you. 
retailers use the common market 
pound, these names have not 
names shown above to describe 
been standardized any govern· 
74 
DEVEINING SHRIMP 
Then gently lift out the vein with the tip of 
your knife. 
makes sense for dishes in which it would 
be inconvenient to retrieve and peel the 
shrimp, such as soups, pastas, or stir-fries. 
To peel shrimp, whether cooked or 
raw, start by grasping the first sections of 
shell (see photo above) and prying them 
open so that the shell splits along the 
shrimp's underside. Then tug on the end 
of the shrimp to slide off the entire shell. 
Before you pull off the tail, think about 
how you intend to serve the shrimp. If the 
shrimp are part of an hors d' oeuvre platter 
and people will be picking them up with 
their fingers or dipping them into a sauce, 
the tail makes a natural handle. The tail 
also comes in handy if you're dipping the 
shrimp in a batter before cooking. If the 
shrimp is part of a dish that's intended to 
be eaten with a fork, removing the tail is up 
to you. Some people think that the tails 
add flavor, others find them unpleasant. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 75 ---
BUTTERFlYING SHRIMP 
Ready to stuff. A perfectly butterflied shrimp cre­
ates a neat packet for a savory seafood stuffing. 
Devein with two quick steps. Though 
deveining is often thought of as a tiresome 
task, it's really quite simple. The point of 
deveining shrimp is to remove the small, 
dark "sand vein" (the shrimp's digestive 
tract) that runs along the back. Eating this 
vein won't make you sick, but it can be 
gritty. To devein shrimp without peeling, 
cut down the back of the shrimp with 
kitchen shears and then pull out the vein 
with the tip of a paring knife. To devein a 
peeled shrimp, slit the flesh with a knife 
and lift out the vein (see photos at left). 
SHRIMP FOR STUFFING 
AND STIR-FRYING 
Butterflied shrimp are simply shrimp that 
have been cut open to lie flat. Keep in 
mind that the larger surface area means 
the shrimp cook more quickly. Butterflied 
shrimp are perfect for a superquick spin in 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
the wok or as a platform for a seafood stuff­
ing. To butterfly, trace the original cut­
where the vein used to be-slicing deeply, 
but taking care not to cut completely 
through (see photos at left). 
SHELLS MAKE A DELICIOUS 
SHRIMP STOCK 
If you've peeled your shrimp raw, you can 
use the shells to make a quick stock. 
Shrimp stock has incredible flavor and can 
be used for soups, sauces, and as a poach­
ing liquid for fish and other shellfish. This 
intense broth won't be particularly pleas­
ing tasted straight, but it will add lots of 
shrimp flavor to other food. Just toss the 
shells from one to two pounds of shrimp in 
a saucepan with a cup and a half of cold 
water, a half cup of dry white wine, a bay 
leaf, a rib of celery, and some chopped 
onion. Bring the liquid to a boil, reduce the 
heat, and simmer gently for 25 minutes. 
Strain the liquid and discard the solids. 
Shrimp stock freezes well. 
-Steven Petusevsky is the creative food 
director at Unicorn Village Market & Restau­
rant in Aventura, Florida. 
Be Prepared to 
Prevent Kitchen Fires 
A few years ago, an out-to-lunch dinner 
guest left a plastic bottle of vegetable oil 
on the stove top after helping me with the 
cooking. As we ate, the bottle melted, and 
within minutes a good grease fire was 
under way. Fortunately, we were able to 
smother the flames before they spread. 
Aside from a few burnt towels and a big 
mess, there was no real damage-but the 
episode made me realize how important 
fire safety should be to every cook. 
YOU CAN STOP MOST FIRES 
BEFORE THEY START 
More house fires begin in the kitchen than 
in any other part of the home, and over 
75% of kitchen fires start because people 
walk away from the kitchen. The lesson 
here is obvious: pay attention while you're 
cooking. But beyond this advice, there are 
precautions that will help you to avoid fires 
and to control those that may occur. 
Fires need fuel. Deprive them of this 
and there's no fire. Small kitchen fires be­
come larger house fires when food, oil, or 
greasy buildup begins to burn and the 
BASICS 
flames then spread to counters and cabi­
nets. You can reduce the risk by keeping 
kitchen surfaces and range hoods clean 
and free of debris. Avoid having towels, 
curtains, paper bags, and other flammable 
material near the stove or oven. Don't 
wear loose-fitting clothing while you're 
cooking: this way, there's nothing to 
dangle over an open flame. 
KEEP A COOL HEAD, 
BUT DON'T BE A HERO 
If you do have a kitchen fire, don't panic. 
Keep in mind that you should never try to 
fight a spreading fire by yourself If a fire 
reaches cabinets, counters, or curtains, 
leave the house and call the fire depart­
ment. But if you spot a small fire as it starts, 
there are a few simple methods to stop it. 
All fires need air, and if you can take 
away a fire's air supply, it will die. Smother­
ing a fire can be as simple as a putting a lid 
on a burning pot, stomping on a burning 
dishtowel, or covering the fire forcefully 
with towels. Water is a great way to ex­
tinguish some fires, but can be deadly for 
others, so don't automatically think of 
dousing the flames. 
EACH TYPE OF FIRE N EEDS 
A DIFFERENT RESPONSE 
Basically, there are three types of fire: 
grease, electrical, and paper (which in­
cludes cloth, wood, plastic, and rubber) . 
Grease fires are the greatest hazard in 
kitchens. Cooking oils all have a tempera­
ture limit (generally 425° to 500°F), called 
a flash point. When heated beyond this 
point, oil will burst into flames. If you reuse 
oil for deep-frying, be aware that as the oil 
gets old, this flash point drops, making it 
more highly flammable. Also, be aware 
that unrefined oils, such as extra-virgin 
olive oil and nut oils, break down and 
catch on fire at much lower temperatures. 
Never throw water on a grease fire-it 
will splatter and spread. Instead, smother 
the flame with a lid or a kitchen towel. 
Throwing baking soda on a small grease 
fire will extinguish it, so keep a large, 
opened box of baking soda close to the 
stove. Salt works too, but not as effectively. 
The best response is to throw baking soda 
on the fire and cover it with a lid. 
Electrical fires can result from faulty 
wiring, overloaded outlets, or malfunc­
tioning appliances. Never throw water on 
75

--- Page 76 ---
" 
The talking stopped after the first bite. The 
of Maille's 
authentic French flavor was exhilarating. It was the perfect Dijon. " 
Crust E. Baguette

--- Page 77 ---
an electrical appliance until you unplug it. 
If an electrical fire starts, immediately un­
plug the appliance. Once the appliance is 
unplugged, the fire no longer electrical, 
and you can then safely smother the flames 
by dousing with water or using a towel or 
fire blanket. To help prevent electrical 
fires, keep your appliances and their cords 
in good condition and replace old appli­
ances as they become worn out. 
Paper fires, the third class of fire, may 
be the most obvious to deal with. To put 
out burning food, paper, wood, cloth, or 
plastic, use water freely and smother the 
flames. For example, pour water on a fire in 
a trash can or stomp on a burning card­
board box. 
DON'T RElY ON EXTINGUISHERS 
Fire extinguishers are sold for home use, 
but they aren't ideal for kitchen fires. 
People are often injured by relying on a 
fire extinguisher instead of calling the fire 
department. The dry chemical solution 
found in most home extinguishers is 
highly pressurized. Even the smallest fire 
extinguisher has enough force to blow a 
good-sized pot and its contents right off 
the stovetop. If you're trying to subdue 
some burning oil in a wok, the force of a 
fire extinguisher could splash burning oil 
across your kitchen and anyone in the 
way. Fire extinguishers are best used to 
put out wood and paper fires or to knock 
down a fire in order to escape a burning 
house. Many local fire departments offer 
THE RULES OF FIRE SAFETY 
• Never leave the kitchen when using the 
stovetop, especially when frying. 
• Keep kitchen surfaces and range hoods 
free of grease and clutter. 
• Don't try to fight a fire that has spread to 
counters or cabinets. Leave the house and 
call 91 1 . 
• Don't deep-fry with old grease or oil. 
• Never throw water on a grease fire-try to 
smother the flames with baking soda, salt, a 
towel, or a fire blanket. 
• Never throw water on an electrical appli­
ance until you've unplugged it. 
• Extinguish burning food, paper, wood, 
cloth, or plastic by smothering or dousing 
with water. 
• Be wary of fire extinguishers, especially 
with burning oil. The force can knock the 
buming pan off the stove and spread the fire. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
training on how to use fire extinguishers, 
a good idea if you plan to keep one in 
your home. Fire blankets are also very 
effective for smothering small fires. Most 
important, install smoke detectors on all 
levels of your home and check their bat­
teries regularly. 
-Molly Stevens is a chef/instructor at the 
New England Culinary Institute. She is a con­
tributing editor to Fine Cooking. 
Blanching Vegetables for 
Better Color and Texture 
My grandmother taught me that a good 
cook always blanches vegetables to be 
eaten raw or in salads. At first I thought 
that she was being fussy, but I've since be­
come a believer in blanching. I appreciate 
the pleasure of nibbling on a neat carrot 
stick or broccoli floret that is more tender 
and flavorful for having been blanched. 
Blanching is a quick, two-step cooking 
technique in which vegetables are cooked 
briefly in a large pot of boiling water and 
then dunked into ice water to stop the 
cooking process. Vegetables intended to 
be part of an hors d'oeuvre platter will be 
more toothsome if blanched, and green, 
orange, and white vegetables will have a 
brighter, more appetizing color. Blanching 
is also useful for long-cooking vegetables 
that are part of a stir-fry or a saute and 
need more than a few seconds in a hot wok 
or frying pan to be cooked through. If you 
want to grill large, dense vegetables, such 
as potatoes or artichokes, they'll cook 
more quickly if you blanch them first. 
GIVE YOUR VEGETABLES 
ROOM TO MOVE 
To blanch your vegetables quickly and 
evenly, you need a lot of water. Fill a pot 
with at least four times the vegetables' vol­
ume in water; for example, use two quarts 
of water for two cups of vegetables. Bring 
the water to a rapid boil and add the vege­
tables. The water should come back to a 
boil within a minute. Leave the pot un­
covered and test for doneness by skewer­
ing a sample and judging its "bite." Begin 
timing once the water returns to a boil. 
The vegetables are done when they're 
slightly tender but not soft. Small, tender 
vegetables will take only a minute or so, 
BASICS 
Scoop the cooked vegetables into a 
strainer and dunk them into a sink or a 
large bowl filled with ice and water. Once 
the vegetables have cooled to the touch, 
remove them from the ice bath or they'll 
start to absorb water. 
Keep the flavors separate. If you're 
blanching several different vegetables, 
cook each one separately. You can save 
time, however, by reusing the water. Just 
be sure to move from mild to strong fla­
vors so that your snow peas don't end up 
tasting like Brussels sprouts. Also, think 
of the colors: white celery root should go 
before orange carrots. Some cooks use 
salted water, others don't. It depends on 
whether the vegetables will receive fur­
ther cooking and seasoning. 
-Molly Stevens • 
Use plenty of rapidly boiling water. The water 
should return to a boil less than a minute after the 
vegetables have been added. 
while larger or tougher vegetables can take 
An icy plunge shocks the vegetables to stop the 
four or five minutes. 
cooking; it also chills them and keeps them crisp. 
77

--- Page 78 ---
FOOD SCIENCE 
Take the Mystery out of 
Melting Chocolate 
Avoid separating and seizing by monitoring 
temperature and moisture 
BY SHIRLEY O. CORRIHER 
W
hen Linnaeus classified the plant 
kingdom, he named the cocoa tree 
Theobroma cacao, the first part of which 
translates to "food of the gods." His choice 
makes perfect sense to those who think the 
taste of chocolate is heavenly. But you may 
find yourself cursing the gods when the 
smooth, glistening chocolate you're melt­
ing turns to dark black knots topped by a 
slick of oil. Or, even more startling, your 
melting chocolate becomes a dull, solid 
mass right before your eyes. 
Heat and moisture-and not capri­
cious gods-are the real culprits here. 
They cause the two most common mis­
haps when melting chocolate: 
• Separation, caused by overheating, is 
when the solids in chocolate separate from 
the fat and clump together. 
• Seizing, caused by moisture, is when the 
flowing chocolate turns into a grainy mass. 
Knowing the source of these problems 
can help you avoid them. 
78 
CHOCOLATE IS MADE OF 
DRY PARTICLES SURROUNDED 
BY COCOA BUTTER 
To understand what happens to choc­
olate when it melts, try to picture its 
components. Dark and milk chocolates 
are made from "nibs" (the processed in­
sides of the cocoa bean) and sugar that 
are ground until their particles measure 
from 25 to 75 microns in diameter. (A 
micron is one millionth of a meter.) 
These fine cocoa and sugar particles (as 
well as milk solids for milk chocolate) are 
kneaded with cocoa butter until they're 
evenly distributed. Most chocolate also 
contains lecithin, a natural fat and 
emulsifier that helps disperse the solids 
in the chocolate. 
Cocoa butter gives chocolate 
a sharp melting point. Instead 
of melting gradually over a range 
of about 1 0 degrees as most fats do, 
cocoa butter has a sharply defined melt­
ing point, so it melts quickly when 
heated to around body temperature. 
This trait, which gives chocolate its 
melt-in-your-mouth quality, can cause 
trouble for cooks. 
OVERHEATING CAUSES 
CHOCOLATE TO SEPARATE 
Because cocoa butter melts quickly and 
at a low temperature, it makes sense to 
melt chocolate over low heat. If you 
don't, it will separate irreversibly. 
When chocolate gets too hot-above 
1 200P for dark chocolate, 1 15° for milk 
and white chocolate-the fats separate 
from the sugar and cocoa particles, which 
then clump together. I had an assistant 
who once boiled the chocolate she was 
melting until there was nothing left but 
lumps and a pale, golden oil. Long before 
you reach that point, you'll know your 
chocolate is separating if you see small 
lumps forming (see photo above right) . 
You know your chocolate is separating when you 
see lumps. Long before you get these big clumps of 
solid chocolate, small solid knots-like those you 
can see on the spatula-begin to appear. 
To avoid separation, watch the tem­
perature, not the texture. This may 
seem obvious, but some unknowing cooks 
mistake the lumps caused by separation 
for solids that have yet to melt, and so they 
tum up the heat. 
I use an accurate thermometer when 
melting chocolate. Beware that most 
kitchen thermometers are offby as much 
as 10 degrees. A laboratory thermometer 
(see sources opposite) is more reliable. 
If you don't have an accurate ther­
mometer, use your body as a gauge; it's a 
better judge of temperature than an in­
accurate thermometer. Touch a dab of 
melting chocolate just above your upper 
lip (a very sensitive area) . The correct 
temperature should feel warm, not hot. 
Here are some basic methods for 
melting chocolate safely: 
• You can melt chocolate in a saucepan 
directly over very low heat, but melting it 
over hot-not boiling-water, is usually 
safer. A double boiler or a hot water bath 
works well. 
• You can also melt chocolate in the 
microwave. Heat dark chocolate on me­
dium heat (50% power) and milk and 
white chocolate, which contain heat­
sensitive milk solids, on low (30% power) . 
Stir the chocolate every 15 seconds, heat­
ing the chocolate until it's just melted. 
• Speed up melting by first cutting the 
chocolate into small pieces, so that more 
surface area is exposed to the heat. 
• Stir chocolate constantly while melt­
ing to keep the temperature consistent 
throughout. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 79 ---
UNINVITED LIQUID CAUSES SEIZING 
If you haven't experienced seizing, it's 
hard to imagine just how startling it is. 
One minute you're stirring sa·tiny liquid 
chocolate, the next you're trying to move 
your spatula through solid clumps. This 
happens when a small amount of mois­
ture gets into the pan of melting choc­
olate and causes the dry cocoa and sugar 
particles that are distributed within the 
cocoa butter to clump together. 
Richard Schwartz, Ph.D., a chemist at 
Wilbur Chocolates in Lititz, Pennsyl­
vania, illustrates this phenomenon by 
calling to mind a bowl of sugar. When 
you dip the spoon that you just used to 
stir your coffee back into the sugar bowl, 
the moisture from the spoon causes the 
dry sugar particles to stick together. 
Protect against stray moisture by 
handling the chocolate carefully. Be­
cause even a little moisture can cause 
seizing, make sure that everything that 
touches the chocolate is bone -dry. 
Watch that steam or water doesn't es­
cape into or splash onto your chocolate 
during heating. Before transferring the 
melted chocolate, wipe the sides of the 
pan or bowl so that water doesn't drip 
into the chocolate. 
A little liquid is dangerous, but a lot 
of it is helpful. Though it sounds para­
doxical, you can protect against seizing by 
melting your chocolate with larger 
amounts ofliquid. Think about that sugar 
bowl again: if you pour boiling water into 
it, all the sugar dissolves, leaving no 
lumps behind. The minimum weight of 
liquid needed to prevent seizing is at least 
25% of the weight of the chocolate; for 
example, 1 tablespoon of liquid (which 
weighs Y2 ounce) for each 2 ounces of 
chocolate. Any less liquid than this will 
cause the chocolate to seize. 
SCIENCE PROJECT-REVIVING SEIZED CHOCOLATE 
To recognize how chocolate seizes, 
deliberately tum a little melted choc­
olate into a solid lump, and then 
bring it back to a shiny liquid. 
Melt 2 to 3 ounces of finely 
chopped chocolate in a small sauce­
pan in a double boiler. Spoon a tea­
spoon of this onto a plate to observe 
later; this will be your "control" choc­
olate. Stir a teaspoon of water into the 
melted chocolate in the pan. When 
it seizes (becomes a dull, thick, grainy 
paste), put a teaspoon of it on the 
Can you tell which of these chocolates has 
seized? Seized chocolate-the middle blob-is 
not a pretty sight. The grainy paste is made by 
minute cocoa and sugar particles clumping 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
same plate. Next, work more water, a 
tablespoon at a time, into the seized 
chocolate, off the heat. It will become 
smooth and shiny once again. Put a 
teaspoon of this on the plate. 
Both the correctly melted choc­
olate and the revived chocolate are 
smooth and shiny, but they have 
slightly different coloring. The seized 
chocolate looks dull and grainy. Even­
tually, the original melted chocolate 
will harden, while the chocolate with 
the added water will remain soft. 
together. Although the salvaged seized choc­
olate (at right) looks almost as appealing as 
the properly melted chocolate (at left), its color 
may be off and it won't set up firm. 
FOOD SCIENCE 
Avoid seizing by melting chocolate 
with other ingredients. If your recipe 
calls for a liquid, you can eliminate the risk 
of seizing by melting your chocolate with 
the liquid. Combine the finely chopped 
chocolate with the liquid in a double boiler 
and heat them together. Try heating the 
liquid and using it to melt the chocolate. 
When chocolatier Ortrud Carstens makes 
ganache, she melts her chopped semisweet 
chocolate by pouring it onto hot cream 
(see Fine Cooking # 2, p. 66) . 
I occasionally see recipes-even in 
well-regarded cookbooks-that tell you to 
add a small amount of liqueur to melted 
chocolate. But if you're not respecting the 
25% rule, the chocolate will seize. Simi­
larly, it's safer to stir melted chocolate into 
other liquid ingredients than to stir liquid 
into melted chocolate, even when you 
have the correct ratio of liquid to choc­
olate. As the first few drops ofliquid meet 
the chocolate, the ratio is off, and the 
chocolate may seize. 
Can seized chocolate be saved? If, 
after taking all these precautions, your 
chocolate still seizes, is there anything you 
can do to resurrect it? Yes and no. Work a 
tablespoon of warm water into the mess off 
the heat. When this is incorporated, add 
more water, a tablespoon at a time, until 
you have a smooth, shiny chocolate. This 
chocolate is fine for uses like icings and fill­
ings, but it won't work in recipes where the 
finished chocolate must set up fum, such 
as for dipped candies or chocolate curls. 
SOURCES FOR ACCURATE 
THERMOMETERS 
If you're a fanatic about chocolate, you might 
want to invest in an accurate thermometer. 
After breaking my fifth mercury thermometer 
into my chocolate, I've switched to the digital 
kind, which I recommend. It runs about $50. A 
probe, which you'll also need, costs about $ 12. 
Laboratory instrument companies 
Cooper Instruments Corp., 33 Reeds Gap Rd., 
Middlefield, CT 06455; 800/835-501 1 
Whatman lab Sales, PO Box 1 359, Hillsboro, 
OR 971 23; 800/942-8626 
Shirley 0. Corriher of Atlanta, Georgia, 
teaches food science and cooking classes 
around the country. She is a contributing 
editor to Fine Cooking. • 
79

--- Page 80 ---
REVIEWS 
Four Views of Indian Cooking 
Cookbooks that highlight this cuisine's 
exotic flavors and simple techniques 
BY JUDITH SUTTON 
• • • • • • 
• CLASSIC
. 
&\ 
INDIAN 
ı 
'5' COOKING \1IV 
• 
Ѕ І 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The only book Ihal teaches the art 
of thiS great and sublle CUISine 
with a full repertory of dishes 
from all the regions of India, 
designed especially 
for the American kitchen 
JULIE SAHNI 
• 
Illustrations by Martsabina Russo 
• 
• • • • • • 
A
merican cooks are finally learning 
that there's more to Indian food than 
curries, The vibrantly flavored dishes and 
generally uncomplicated techniques that 
characterize Indian cooking have made it 
one of the most popular cuisines to hit this 
country in a while. Furthermore, since 
much of India's population is vegetarian, 
its cuisine includes some extraordinary 
vegetable dishes; these dishes are emi­
nently appealing to American cooks who 
are turning to a lighter diet and re­
discovering vegetables along the way. 
I£Indian food still seems exotic, there's 
no reason for it to remain mysterious. 
Many of the ingredients used most often 
in Indian dishes have become far more 
widely available than they were even a few 
80 
years ago. Much of what you need is wait­
ing for you at any good grocery store, and a 
single trip to an Indian or other specialty 
food market should be enough to stock 
your pantry with the more unusual sea­
sonings called for in the four books dis­
cussed here. 
For recent converts to Indian food, Julie 
Sahni's first book, Classic Indian Cooking, 
is just about the best introduction to tradi­
tional Indian cuisine there is. The intro­
ductory section, nearly 1 00 pages long, 
serves as a mini cooking course. Sahni 
begins with an extensive glossary of the 
seasonings that define Indian cooking. 
She devotes only a few pages to equip­
ment, reassuring readers that most Indian 
dishes can be prepared with the utensils 
and tools found in any American kitchen. 
Sahni concentrates on techniques and 
finishes with a guide to planning an In­
dian meal. Useful line drawings through­
out the book illustrate techniques and un­
familiar ingredients . 
to main dishes, side dishes and other 
accompaniments, and desserts and bev­
erages. The recipes are clearly written, 
with explicit instructions and detailed 
explanations at each step of the way. In 
addition, every recipe is followed by 
thoughtful suggestions for serving the 
dish as part of a variety of different 
menus-a light meal, an all-seafood din­
ner, or perhaps a particularly spicy 
menu-according to the cook's whim. 
Madhur Jaffrey's A Taste of India also 
concentrates on classic Indian cooking, 
but her book is part cookbook, part travel-
ogue, and part cultural 
Sahni grew up in 
northern India, and 
For recent converts 
the cooking of that re-
to Indian food, J ulie 
gion is her specialty, 
and culinary history. 
Recipes are arranged 
by region. The book is 
filled with color photo­
graphs of breathtaking 
landscapes and lively 
urban scenes, of people 
and architectural land­
marks, of market stalls 
heaped with produce, 
sacks overflowing with 
grains and legumes, and 
of the dishes created 
from these ingredients. 
but all of the various 
regional cuisines are 
represented here, with 
recipe headnotes giv­
ing the provenance of 
the dishes. The book 
Sahni's first book is 
just about the best 
introduction to 
begins with a chapter 
traditional I ndian 
on snacks and appetiz-
ers. Although in most 
cuisine there is. 
of India, traditional 
meals don't have sep-
arate courses, the custom of serving a first 
course has been adopted in some upscale 
households-and Indians have always 
enjoyed nibbling on such delicacies as 
Silky Bean Dumplings throughout the 
day. The succeeding chapters are devoted 
The introduction to 
each section provides a brief overview of 
the region's history, and then describes the 
characteristic features of the cuisine, often 
through personal anecdotes from people 
Jaffrey encountered in her travels. The 
special foods reserved for celebrations and 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 81 ---
ceremonies frequently figure in these de­
scriptions. Together, the text and photo­
graphs create a vivid and lively portrait of 
India and its people, setting the recipes in 
their context. Many recipes come from 
home cooks Jaffrey met along the way, so 
you find, for example, Spicy Crabs from 
Ruby Palchoudhuri's Household in the 
Bengal chapter. Like Sahni, Jaffrey grew 
up in northern India, and most of the 
recipes in the Delhi chapter, as well as a 
good number of those in the other sec­
tions, are her own. 
With Chandra Padmanabhan's Dak­
shin-Vegetarian Cuisine from South 
India, the lesser-known cooking of the 
southern half ofIndia comes into its own. 
Padmanabhan's beautifully illustrated 
book provides a wonderful introduction 
to the unusual, spicy, and mouthwatering 
vegetable dishes of the country's southern 
states (Dakshin is Sanskrit for "south") . 
She provides only a brief introduction to 
the cuisine, but the recipes and tantalizing 
color photographs of most of the dishes 
more than make up for this shortcoming. 
A glossary and the headnotes to the 
recipes provide additional information. 
In contrast to the rest of the country, 
southern Indian meals usually consist of 
separate courses. Padmanabhan starts 
REVIEWS 
with sambars, served as first courses­
thick, spicy sauce/stews, such as Pepper 
Sambar or Curry-Leaf Sambar. Next are 
the soupy, often piquant rasams, such as 
Lemon or Ginger Rasam; cooling yogurt 
dishes are usually the third course. Most of 
these dishes will be new to American 
readers; in fact, even Sahni and Jaffrey in­
clude only one sambar recipe each. The 
book also includes vegetable dishes served 
as accompaniments or as a lighter meal, 
salads, a separate section on rice dishes, 
and snacks. Padmanabhan's prose is not 
always wonderful, and there are a few 
oversights (no basic recipe for cooking rice 
is included), but simply leafing through the 
book will make you want to try almost 
every dish. 
For a cross-cultural interpretation, 
there is Neelam Batra's The Indian %ge­
tarian-Flavors of India for the 
Americ
an 
Kitchen. Although she is a native of New 
Delhi, Batra has lived in California, where 
she teaches cooking, for more than twenty 
years. Consequently, her cooking style 
is an intriguing mix of old and new. In 
To Be The Best, 
Study With The Best. 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Olympic Award Winning Chef-Instructors 
• American Culinary Federation Accredited 
I 8-Month Degree Program in both Culinary 
Arts & Pastry Arts • Restaurant Management 
• Financial Aid If Qualified • Lifetime, 
Worldwide Graduate Employment Services 
1-800-844- 1354 
LMN Sullivan College'S 
. 
~jI 
NatioȄal.Center for 
-...U 
HospItahty StudIes 
3101 Bardstown Road · Louisville, KY 40205 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Cooking Software that 
Makes Sense! 
Let your Macintosh™ power through the "book 
• 
work" of cooking. Zero in on recipes by ingredient • 
and many other ways, plan meals, scale recipes 
and create shopping lists at the speed of thought. 
Acclaimed by Cookbook Review as "great 
culinary software!," Mangia! is unconditionally 
guaranteed to delight you. 
Mangia! runs on any modern Macintosh (without 
HyperCard™) and comes with over 300 recipes for 
well under $50. 
UP5TILL 
SOFTWARE 
1442A Walnut. Berkeley, CA • 94709 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Call 1-800-JOT-DOWN to order or leam more. 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
• 
81

--- Page 82 ---
REVIEWS 
addition to traditional recipes, there are 
dishes inspired by her discoveries in the 
fam1ers' market, such as Fresh Black-Eyed 
Peas in Tomato Fenugreek Sauce; recipes 
that blend different ethnic cuisines, such 
as Rice with Basil & Sun-Dried Tomatoes; 
and "new-style" Indian dishes, such as 
Wild Rice with Cardamom Pods & Bay 
Leaves, that combine traditional Indian 
flavorings with ingredients not known 
there. In another departure from the 
norm, Batra devotes a chapter to Indian 
sauces, not usually treated as separate 
recipes, with the intention of making them 
more versatile, rather than just the base for 
specific dishes. For example, she recom­
mends serving Creamy Saffron Sauce not 
only with Nine Jewel Vegetables but also 
with any grilled vegetable or with pasta­
and she suggests serving Fresh Mango & 
Ginger Sauce with pakoras, sauteed vege­
tables, or Chinese egg rolls. 
Oddly enough, although she men­
tions India's large vegetarian population, 
Batra never really describes the vegetar­
ian diet as such. She occasionally refers 
E E L A 
B AT R A 
I 
T H E 
N1)
IAN 
VEGETA6RIAN 
F l a o r s 
( o r ' '' e 
to nutritional benefits and to "heart­
healthy" dishes, but many headnotes 
suggest pairing the recipes with grilled or 
barbecued meats or with chicken or fish. 
These suggestions sound good; they just 
seem somewhat surprising in a book with 
"vegetarian" in the title. Perhaps the 
BEST FROM THE SOUTHWEST 
82 
TEX-MEX uniquely colored designed recipes direct from our 
kitchen to yours will add traditional flavor favorites to your 
table. Tex-Mex postcard recipe cuisines that you've never 
seen, will arrive monthly for one year just in time for 
preparing your savored Southwest dish. Too hot for this 
summer? Cool by your pool with our cold 
Chile Con Queso! 
Also, Chalupas, Gorditas, Faj ita Ritas. 
Order today! Only $29.95. 
Send Check to: 
LOS CAPCOS 
P.O. Box 222112, El Paso, Texas 79913 
JON ALFONSO FOODK 
HARD TO FIND 
MEXICAN 
CHILES, HERBS, 
SPICES AND 
SEASONINGS. 
SPICY SALSAS 
AND SAUCES, 
MEXICAN 
COOKING 
'-. 
UTENSI LS, ETC. 
G
ail $1.00 and receive a catalog, reCipes and a $2.00 credit 
for your first order. 
P.O. Box 201988 * Austin, Texas * 78720-1988 İ 
book is mistitled-with its fresh flavors 
and creative interpretation of Indian 
cooking, its appeal certainly isn't limited 
to vegetarians. 
PUBLISHING INFORMATION 
Classic Indian Cooking, by Julie S a h n i . 
Morrow, 1 980. $25, hardcover; 542 pp. 
ISBN 0-688-03721 -6. 
A Taste of India, by Madhur Jaffrey. Mac­
millan, 1 985. $24.95, paperback; 256 pp. 
ISBN 0-689-70726-6. 
Dakshin-Vegetarian Cuisine from South 
India, by Chandra Padmanabhan. Harper 
Collins, 1 994. $24, hardcover; 1 64pp. ISBN 
0-207-1 8477-1 . 
The Indian Vegetarian-Flavors of India for 
the American Kitchen, by Neelam Batra, with 
Shelly Rothschild-Sherwin. Macmillan, 
1 994. $25, hardcover; 380pp. ISBN 00-02-
507675-2. 
Judith Sutton received a grand dip lome 
from La Varenne cooking school in Paris. 
She is a food writer and recipe developer in 
New York City . • 
WIKING 
New ideas . . . 
tested methods . . . 
great advice! 
All the great cooking you ever 
wanted is yours in Fine Cooking. 
Every issue gives you new foods, 
ingredients, recipes, processes, 
advice, ideas and step-by-step 
methods. 6 issues, $26 a year 
(outside the u.s. $32, GST 
included). If at any time you aren't 
satisfied with Fine Cooking, we'll 
gladly refund your money in full. 
Subscribe Today, Risk Free. 
To order, call toll free 1-800-888-
8286 and ask for operator 159. 
Taunton 
M A G A Z I N E S 
for fellow enthusiasts 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 83 ---
Professional 
Training 
• Small Cl
asses 
• Hands-on Curriculum. 
• Accelerated A.O.S. Degree 
& &ottsdale 
Culinary 
Institute 
L O V E T o C O O l ? 
Start your own proven and profitable 
Home Based Service Business utilizing your 
Creative Cooking abilities. Learn how to start and 
operate a successful Personal Chef Service business 
from the originator and pioneer of the 
Personal Chef Service industry-the U SPCA. 
Our Personal Chef Service Business Training System 
includes: 
-TRAINING MANUAL 
-STARTER RECIPES 
-MARKETING MATERIALS 
-FORMS AND CONTRACTS 
-COMPUTER SOFTWARE 
-ONE YEAR TELEPHONE SUPPORT 
CALL FOR YOUR FREE INFORMATION PACKAGE! 
M/C 
1 -800-547-791 5 
UNITED STATES PERSONAL CHEF ASSOCIATION 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
Listed in Entrepreneur Magazine's 
1993 Business Opportunity Top 500. 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
VISA 
N. Y. Cake & Baking 
Distributor 
The Cake Center for all your Baking 
and Decorating Needs 
Over I OįOOO Items 
Fully Stocked 
We carry the full line _ 
of Wilton Products .. 
• Cake Rings in all Shapes & Sizes 
• ROillld Pans from 1" to 4" deep 
in even & odd sizes 
• Real Chocolate Vanleer & Valrhona 
• Ready-made Gumpaste 
& Sugar Flowers 
• Gold Powder 
• Silver & Gold Dragees 
• A complete line of Gumpaste 
Cutters & Silicone Molds 
• Books & Videos 
C
AKE
S: New York Style 
Video featuring Joan Mansour, Thomas Shipley, 
Colette Peters, 3 of NY's Finest Decorators. 
RETAIL & WHOLESALE PRICES 
* * *MAIL ORDER CATALOG* * * 
Visit our School of Confectionery Arts 
((The School is well known for creating Great Bakers 
and Cake Decorators))) Resident Magazine. 1994 
FOR A FREE SCHEDULE OF CLASSES 
CALL (111) 67S-CAKE 
56 WESf 22ND STREET' NEW YORK, NY 10010 
83

--- Page 84 ---
FLAVORINGS 
Golden, Fragrant Saffron 
Add color and an irresistible aroma to everything 
from mashed potatoes to bouillabaisse 
BY SAM HAYWARD 
84 
CROCUS 
SATIVUS 
To bring out saffron's 
fullest flavor, make 
an infusion with the 
threads and add it 
to the dish (see direc­
tions at right). 
T
he flavor of saffron is difficult to 
describe, but its presence in food is un­
mistakable. Slightly bitter, intensely aro­
matic, and a little bit sweet, once you taste 
it you'll never forget it. Turmeric and 
ground safflower petals can tint food the 
same golden hue, but there's no substitute 
for the taste of true saffron. 
The spice itself is the stigma of a fall­
blooming crocus (Crocus sativus) that's na­
tive to the eastern Mediterranean and 
southern Europe. Today, saffron is culti­
vated mainly in Spain, Iran, and northern 
India. Because it's harvested and processed 
entirely by hand, as it has been for cen­
turies, saffron is one of the costliest of 
spices-over $200 per pound. 
TOAST THE THREADS TO RElEASE 
SAFFRON'S PRECIOUS FLAVOR 
The uncomplicated flavor of starchy 
foods, such as grains, pasta, and potatoes, 
provides an ideal backdrop for saffron's 
own exotic taste. Add saffron to a broth 
for steaming couscous, and you'll in­
fuse the finished dish with its deli-
cate fragrance. Risotto Milanese, 
) the classic Italian rice dish, gets its 
golden color and irresistible 
aroma from saffron. Throughout 
Scandinavia, saffron is used to 
season breads and cakes. And, of 
course, no paella or bouillabaisse is 
complete without a dose of saffron. 
When I want to spoil myself, I add some 
to my mashed potatoes. 
For even color and maximum flavor, 
don't add saffron directly; instead, first 
make a reduced saffron infusion. 
• Crumble the threads slightly and lightly 
toast them in a dry pan over very low heat. 
Heating the saffron liquefies their color­
and flavor-bearing oils and makes for a 
more flavorful infusion. 
• Next, add a little hot water, bring to a 
boil, and reduce the mixture slightly. Add 
this infusion to whatever you're cooking, 
for example, the liquid for a rice pilaf, a 
soup, or a bread dough. There's no need 
to strain the infusion. 
This technique is useful when com­
bining saffron with acidic ingredients, 
such as vinegar, lemon juice, and very tart 
wines, which inhibit its ability to color. 
Saffron's high price and intense flavor 
dictate that it be used sparingly. One­
quarter teaspoon is enough to flavor one 
cup of uncooked rice, enough for four 
average servings. Too much saffron is not a 
good thing-it will leave your food with 
an unpleasant medicinal taste. 
RED THREADS MEAN 
THE FINEST SAFFRON 
Most saffron available in North America 
comes from the Mancha region of Spain 
and is graded according to the ratio of red 
to yellow threads. The best and costliest 
saffron has the fewest yellow threads. The 
finest-grade Spanish saffron, called coupe, 
is rarely available in our markets. We do 
enjoy a plentiful supply of " superior" grade 
Spanish saffron, which typically contains a 
red-to-yellow ratio of ten to one. 
The most prized saffron comes from the 
Kashmir region ofIndia, but because of po­
litical strife in that region, very little Kash­
mir saffron gets to American markets. The 
best Kashmir saffron, Mogra Cream, is 
pure vermilion with no yellow threads. 
Penzeys, Ltd., Spice House (4 14/574-
0277), is the only source I know of in this 
country for Kashmir Mogra Cream saffron. 
Powdered saffron, less expensive than 
the whole threads, isn't worth the savings. 
Like any ground spice, saffron's flavor and 
aroma fade quickly when crushed. Also, 
unscrupulous traders sometimes combine 
powdered saffron with turmeric and other 
inferior ingredients . 
Saffron is a seasonal crop and is best 
purchased shortly after the harvest in the 
fall. Even though saffron is partially dried 
when it's processed, it should still feel soft 
and moist, never brittle or hard. To keep 
saffron moist and fragrant, transfer it to an 
airtight glass jar and store it in the freezer. 
Sam Hayward is the executive chef at the 
Harraseeket Inn in Freeport, Maine. • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 85 ---
Experience 
the best. 
Tender five star beef 
aged to perfection 
caU30J-424-J877 or 
1-800-707 MEAT 
for delivery 
We now accept Visa and MasterCard 
ȃ dfntu,u£' eMail 
dfd {!wMn d(E.!tau'tant 
dWWW {!atft4. 5Pau' 
The Perfect Gourmet Gift! It's 
Uniquely Mississippi! 
{!tu!ie {!atfi!h 
A NEW cookbook of exciting and 
unusual catfish recipes from this 
gourmet restaurant in the 
Mississippi Delta-
Hard cover that opens Oat $]4.95 
0u.'L q}OU'Lmd g>/L &(lxu a.'Lͨ 
9abulod 
Call to order or receive our brochure 
1-800-833-7731 
P.O. Box 540, Indianola, MS 38751 
FAX: 601-887-5547 
A Cracker Made With Wine? 
AMERICAN VINTAGE WINE BISCUITS 
are deliciously different crackers 
made with wine & black pepper. 
Always a perfect accompaniment, 
serve these crackers with erudite, 
cheeses, pates, cocktails, appetiz­
ers, wine-tastings, soups, salads, 
munchies, dips or anything you 
can imagine: even ice cream. 
Their striking combination of 
flavors make them 
irresistible 
on their 
own like 
2 BAG SIZES: 4.5 OZ. & 8 OZ. 
Try our sampler packs: 
• 3 small and 2 large bags . . . . . $27 .00 
• 2 large bags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $15.00 
(includes shipping in continental US) 
Credit cards call: 718·361·2358 
MG, Visa, AmEx. Or mail check or money order to: 
American Vintage Wine Biscuits, 
40·03 27th Street. Long Island City. NY 11101. 
Ask lor us at your lavorite store. 
S U B S C R I B E R L I S T S E RV I C E 
Occasionally, we make our subscriber list available to companies whose products we 
think might be of some interest to you. If you prefer not to receive this mail, just send 
a note with your mailing label (or an exact copy) to the address below. 
We'll take care of the rest. 
Subscriber Service Department 
The Taunton Press. P.O. Box 5506. 63 South Main Street. Newtown. cr 06470-5506 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Introducing! 
The most enticing 
culinary creation yet! 
Chef..'R,AllsTM by 
Chefwear 
Chef-'R-Alls are made in the U.S.A. 
of 100% cotton. Unisex sizes XS-XXXL 
& XXLL. Available in black & white 
houndstooth or chalkstripe {shown}. 
Gary L. Fleck of Ghefwear, Inc. 
To place an order or to request a 
catalog, call toll free: 
1. 800.LOV. CHEF 
(1.800.568.2433)

--- Page 86 ---
PRESENTATIONS 
Here we show off the work of cooks 
who are good at showing off their 
food. The featured cook selects a few 
signature dishes and explains how 
each one is assembled and presented. 
Tropical 
Temptations 
by Douglas Rodriguez, 
chef/owner of Patria, New York City 
Giraldi Puro de Chocolate (Chocolate Cigar). Even 
nonsmokers like to order this cigar after dinner. I 
make this popular dessert by covering a piece of 
sponge cake with a stiff chocolate mousse. Using 
plastic wrap, I roll the ingredients into a cigar shape 
and freeze it. Before serving, I roll the cigar in a blend 
of cocoa powder and confectioners' sugar. The 
matchsticks are a pas tillage, made from confectioners' 
sugar, vinegar, and gelatin, that is rolled and cut into 
shape. I dip the tips in thinned pink royal icing. The 
matchbook is a cookie that's molded while it's still 
hot from the oven. The plate is finished with a scoop 
of spice-bread ice cream and a dusting of confec­
tioners' sugar and cocoa powder. 
86 
Honduran Seviche. In this variation on seviche, I 
toss raw tuna with ginger, minced chile, and coconut 
milk. To present the dish, I fill a large, concave plate 
with ice and sprinkle that with diced red peppers, 
shaved coconut, and mache. I fill half of a dry coconut 
with the seviche and set that on top of the ice. A 
couple of slices of fried green plantain explode out of 
the coconut shell for added excitement and flavor. 
Chilean Salmon. The most striking aspect of this dish 
is the ring of potatoes that circles the mango-mustard­
glazed salmon and calamari-studded rice. To make the 
ring, I cut spaghetti-like strands of potatoes using a 
special tool from Japan, wrap the strands around a 
metal ring, and deep-fry them. After carefully sliding 
the fried potatoes off the ring, I arrange them on the 
plate, layer the rice and the salmon over the bottom of 
the ring, and garnish with watercress and chives . • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 87 ---
r • • • • • • • • • • • 
• 
.F UFI 
• 
• 
HAN
DS 
• 
: 
YOU 
: 
• 
A 
LEM
ON, 
• 
• 
MAKE
A
 
• 
: 
SOUFFLE. 
: 
• 
Sometimes the best way to get 
• 
• 
ahead is to go back. To school. 
Our unique, 2 year program offers: 
• 
• • Hands-on culinary training 
• 
• 
• 7 to 1 student/teacher ratio 
• 
• Paid, personalized internships 
• • Finandal aid for qualified students • 
• • Advanced Placement available 
• 
• 
• A.O.S. degree in Culinary Arts 
• 
• NEW: Bachelor's degree program in 
• 
Service and Management 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
• • 
250 Main St., Dept. FC 
• 
Montpelier, vr 05602-9720 
• 
Telephone (802) 223-6324 • 
• • • • • • • • • • • • 
Accredited Member, ACCSCT 
You WON'T FIND 
THIS GREAT CHARDONNAY 
ANYwH
ERE ELSE! 
Our newly released 1993 Preston Ranch Chardonnay 
is available exclusively from the winery . . . for just 
$96 a case. The last six vintages of Preston Ranch 
Chardonnay have been Gold Medal winners, so this 
one won't last long! Order today and we'll deliver to 
your home or office. Satisfaction guaranteed. 
$10 INTRODUCTORY OFFER 
As an introduction to Windsor's Preston Ranch 
Chardonnay, order one bottle - one time only ­
for only $ 10. 
In 1993, our winemaker received the Andre 
T chelistcheff "Winemaker of the Year" award from 
Bon Appetit magazme .. One taste of this classic 
Chardonnay and you'll understand why. 
TO ORDER, CALL 
800-333-9987 
OFFER EXPIRES 10/31195 
CA, NY, Nl, llo FL AND OR 
RESIDENTS ONLY 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Travel and Learn 
This could be your most 
memorable vacation. Join 
our small, escorted group 
to explore ... 
The Wines and 
Cuisine of Tuscany 
6 nights at 'Il Borghetto' in 
the heart of the Chianti region 
hands-on cooking from sim­
ple technique to advanced recipes 
Special demonstrations and 
tastings of olive oil and bal­
samic vinegar, and an evening 
of Italian wines and wine tast­
ing with a Master of Wine 
Tours and tastings at pre­
mier estates of the region 
Sept. 24 - Oct. 1, 1995 
limited to 12 participants 
For a brochure, please call 
• Mariner Tourd 
1-617-267-61 13 
GIVE THE GIFT THEY WILL LOVE 
8 gourmet bottles of beer 
(4 twin paks) fresh from 
select microbreweries, 
in a gift pail. 
'2 195 + Ship. 
ALE IN THE MAIL 
CLUB MEMBERSHIPS 
Experience a wide 
selection of microbrewed '1395 
beers each month From ֚
eSt, . 
l ·aOO·S·SEND·AlE 
iVISAI 
1 -800-573-6325 
II 
Void where prohibited. Participants must be 21 or older. 
87

--- Page 88 ---
CALENDAR 
Sponsoring an event that you want readers to know 
about? Send an announc
emen
t to Calendar, Fine 
Cooking, PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470· 
5506. Be sure to include dates, a complete address, 
and the phone number to call far mare inf
orma
tion. 
Listings are free, but restricted to events of direct 
interest to cooks. TIte deadline far entries in the 
December/Jan
uary issue is September 1. 
ARKANSAS 
Festival-19th Annual Hope Watermelon Festival, 
August 1 7-20, Fair Park, Hope. Call 5011777·3640. 
CALIFORNIA 
Showcase---4th Annual Mendocino Bounty, August 
20, Fetzer Food & Wine Center at Valley Oaks, Hop. 
land. Sample food and wine from over 100 county pro· 
ducers. Call Kate at 707/462·3306. 
Festival-I I th Annual A La Carte, A La Park, Sep· 
tember 2-4, Sharon Meadow, Golden Gate Park, San 
Francisco. For information, call 41 51383·93 78. 
Workshop--
9th Annual American Harvest Work· 
shop, September 10--13, Cakebread Cellars, Ruther· 
ford. Educational seminars and dinners. Call Karen 
Cakebread at 707(963·522 1. 
Festival-36th Annual Artichoke Festival, Septem. 
ber 23-24, Castroville. Call 408/633·2465. 
COLORADO 
Festival-The Denver Post LoDo BrewFest, August 
1 2-13, Lower Downtown, Denver. Beer festival cel· 
ebrating over 30 local brewpubs and microbreweries. 
Call Barbara Macfarlane at 303(964·8997. 
HAWAII 
Festival-6th Annual Maui Onion Festival, August 
4-6, Whalers Village, Kaanapali Beach, Maui. Sweet 
COOK'S MARKET 
88 
JnspiPed Food & Wine CPL\ises 
Tastin9s and TOl-lt's 
BL\P9L\ndy, BoPdeaL\X, PPovence 
Le Boat, :lnc. 
800-992-0291 
Maui onions grown on the slopes of Hal eakal a Crater, 
a dormant volcano. For information, call Doug Rigg 
at 808/596·0033. 
ILLINOIS 
Food Show-7th Annual Best of the Midwest Mar· 
ket at Ravinia, September 10, Ravinia Festival 
Grounds, Highland Park. Food and beverages from 
1 2 Midwestern states. Ca1l 3 1 2·RA VINIA. 
INDIANA 
Festival-49th Annual Persimmon Festival, Sep. 
tember 23-30, Main Street, Mitchell. Persimmon 
pudding cooking contest and a persimmon novelty 
desserts contest. Call 800/580· 1985 . 
KENTUCKY 
Festival-26th Annual Marion County Ham Days, 
September 23-24, Main St., Lebanon. For informa· 
tion, call 502(692. 2661. 
MAINE 
Festival-48th Annual Maine Lobster Festival, Au· 
gust 3-6, Harbor Park, Rockland. Call 207/596.0376. 
NEW MEXICO 
Festival-Santa Fe Wine & Chile Fiesta, September 
28 through October 1, Santa Fe. Call 505(982·8686. 
N EW YORK 
Festival-Scarborough Fair Herb Festival, September 
1 0, Mills Mansion State Historic Site, Staatsburg. 
Workshops and lectures, plus culinary demonstrations 
by local chefs and the Culinary Institute of America. 
Call Andrew Koehn at 914/677 ·8223, ext. 105. 
Contest-4th Annual Cake Decorating Contest, Sep· 
tember 17, 
ew York Cake & Baking Centeć New York 
City. Open to the public. Deadline for entries: August 
3 1 . Call 2 12/675·CAKE. 
- INSPIRED BY 
IC 19TH CENTURY 
RECIPES & DESIGNS -
THE EXCLUSIVE SOURCE FOR GOURMET FOODS AND 
HDME/TABlETOP ACCESSORIES FROM THE ROUANne ERA ֙
 
Catalog $2.00. Write or call: 
b 
• 
THE VICTORIAN CUPBOARD Catalog 
• 
4-
P.O. Box 1852, Old Chelsea Station, NY 101 13 
t 
ȁ 
1-800-653-8033 
Ȁ 
I Love to Cook? I 
Turn Your Passion into Profits! 
Learn Party Planning and Catering 
Call 1-800-701-6323 for info 
Tasting-10th Annual AIWF Marketplace Tasting, 
September 23, World Trade Center Mezzanine, New 
York City. A meeting place where regional farmers 
taste and talk about food and its future with their 
neighbors and consumers. For information, call 
2 121447·0456. 
PENNSYLVAN IA 
Festival-National Mushroom Festival, August 3 1 
through September 24, Kennett Square. Recipe 
cookoff contest: September 16. Symposium; dinner 
prepared by internationally acclaimed chefs: Sep· 
tember 2 1 . Festival with mushroom picking contest 
and mushroom dishes: September 24. For informa· 
tion, call 800(932·6369. 
Festival-l04th Annual Bean Soup Celebration, Sep· 
tember 12-16, McClure. all 8001338·7389. 
TEXAS 
Contest-5th Annual Austin Chronicle Hot Sauce 
Contest, August 27, Travis County Farmers' Market, 
Austin. Open to the public. Deadline for entries: Au· 
gust 25. For information, call Elizabeth at 5 121454· 
5 766. 
WASHINGTON 
Serninar
--C
uisines of the Pacific Northwest, August 
22-27, Seattle. Explore the region's wine and food 
industries, and ethnic influences unique to the Seat· 
tle area. Lectures, tours, gourmet meals, wine tast· 
ings, and cooking demonstrations. Sponsored by the 
Smithsonian Institution and American Institute of 
Wine & Food. For information, call 2021 357 -4 700. 
WISCONSIN 
Conference-1 2th Annual American Cheese Soci· 
ety Conference, August 1-4, Green Bay. Call 
Dominique Delugeau at 414/863·1 1 53. 
EARTHSTONE 
WOODȂFIRE OVENS 
THE ULTIMATE GOURMET APPLIANCE 
213-656-5926 
237 S. La Brea Ave .• Los Angeles CA 90036 
[3(?(!R 000 -..:-­
UJIO(! nO(J[J,y 1 
Greater Boston's oldest and most complete 
homebrewing supplier and mail order house. 
-OUALITY SUPPLIES 
• LARGEST SELECTION 
• 
,XCELL,NT SERVICE 
• FULLY STOCKED 
• 
fAST DELIVERY 
• WAREHOUSE STORE 
FREE CATALOG 
800·523·5ͧ 23 
'3oJ 'j.':. B''S:I.' 
U;" Di801 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 89 ---
PROFESSIONAL HOME 
ǺǻǼTr APPLIANCES 
SAVE ON •.• 
-VIKING 
-DYNASTY 
-GARLAND 
-DACOR 
-SUB-ZERO 
iiiĭII!!Į::J -RANGE H
OO
DS 
Call for a quote. please have model numbers ready 
1 -800-2 1 3-7747 
C-N-D MARKETING 
q
Ѓ
SHOPPE 
... We offer one of the most extensive selections 
of traditional British foods & cheeses in the U.S. 
... Phone 1-800-8GB-NOSH or Fax your order to 
us, & it will be on it's way to you via UPS. 
... 
isit our cbarming New Englano seas;a::"
e --­
village & Circa 1690 shoppe & tearoom. 
Three Million Pieces China, 
Crystal. Flatware &: Collectibles 
Obsolete, Inactive And Active. 
Buy Or Sell. 
REPLACEMENTS, LID. 
1089 Knox Road. PO Box 26029 
Greensboro. NC 27420 - Dept. FK 
1-800-REPLACE 
(1-800-737 -5223) 
Protect Your Issues of 
Fine Cooking 
SLIPCASES FOR YOUR 
BACK ISSUES. Bound in 
red leatherette and embossed 
in gold, each case holds up to 
ten issues of Fine Cooking, 
and costs $8.95 (save: buy 3 
for $24.95, 6 for $45.95). Add 
$ 1.50/case for p&h. Outside 
the continental U.S., 
induding AI< and HI, add 
$3.50 each (U.S. funds only). 
PA residents add 7% sales 
tax. Send your order and 
payment to the address below, or call toU free, 1-800-825-
6690, and use your credit card (
minim
um $15). 
Jesse Jones Ind., Dept. 95 Fe, 499 E. Erie Ave., 
Philadelphia, PA 19134. (No P.O. boxes, please) 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Pure 
Mancha 
Select Saffron 
Always Available 
FREE 70 PAGE CATALOG 
Spices - Teas - Coffees 
1 800 228-4276 
2521 RUSSELL STREET. DETROIT. MI 48207 
KIf-JIII-J Є Ɔ. Ɔ lIIt1.t1 =-... ..,.. 
Bite-Size, 
}osIe}o. 
Crackly-Crusted 
Gourmet Croutons 
CLASSIC 
B
READ
 
CRUNCH 
From Our Fresh Baked 
C
ROUTO
NSͦ 
Old World Breads. 
T .... "-' 
a...-. 
Three Varieties! 
_91: .. .. . 1 
I 
Great For 
• Snacking • Fondue • Salads 
• Soups 
• And Much More! 
Charmingly Packaged For Perfect Gift-Giving! 
For Brochure And Order Information Call Or Write: 
JosicJo & Co . 
p.o. Box 6181 2 · Virginia Beach, VA 23466 
1 -80D-2-JOSIEJO (1-80D-256-7435) 
Mauna Loa Volcano, on the lIAW
AIIAN 
Ђig Island ǽH.aǾ, ǿffers }' 
nch voIcaruc soil WIth Just ֘
 
the right mix of sun, shade C03f- O. 
and rain£ill-perfect coffee gro\WJg 
. . 
conditions. It is here that Kona 
coffe is raised. T I)' a cup and we think y 
agree ... 
"the smooth, rich taste is a wonderful experience.» 
To receive your rich tasting Hawaiian Fine Kona blend 
coffee end= $ 8.99 plus $2.99 shipping and handling, 
per 1/2 lb. package. 
Please send check or money order to: 
Hawaiian Fme Coffee Company 
P.o. Box 1552 
Pearl City, Hawaii 96782 
GOURMET 
MUSHROOMS 
Freshly harvested 
Morels, ChantereIIes, 
Cepes and many 
other varieties, 
Dried mushrooms 
and a large selection 
of specialty foods 
also available. 
To order or for brochure call: 
1-(800)-569-6101 
Visa and Mastercard accepted. 
Taste the Southwest! 
Gourmet chile peppers: Roasted & Individually Quick­
Frozen. FI"esh and dried Roma Tomatoes (red or yellow). 
All grower-d_ir"cct to you! Shipped UPS nationwide. 
-'* CHILE I.A F;l.A 
ǹ 
Chile La Isla, P.O. Box 1379, Fabens, Texas 79838 
(800) 8954603 
COOK'S MARKET 
Cooking Classes in Umbria 
and on the Cote 0' Azur 
+ Learn to prepare Umbrian Regional 
Dishes while visiting Perugia, Spoleto. 
Assisi. Gubbio and Norcia. 
Departures Oct. 1 and Oct. 9. 1995 
+ Visit Cannes. Nice, Monaco while 
learning La Cuisine Du Soleil with 
Roger Verge in Mougins. 
Depart Sept. 30. 1995 
Capital Tours Ltd. 
TeI 613-230-1955 
Fax 613-230-8811 
427 Preston St . #204. Ottawa. Ontario. KIS 4N3 Can. 
A beautiful change to the daily 
A colorful hand painted italian stoneware 
mortar and rock maple pestle that are a 
delight to use. $19.95 + $5.50 SIIlPPING 
TO ORDER. CALL: 1-800-814-7 486 
I L (ONTADINO 
21 MYRTLE TER .• WAKEFIELD, M A 01 880 
"NAME YOUR GAME" EXOTIC FRESH MEATS 
""Bison, Boar, Emu, Venison, Elk, Antelope, 
Kangaroo, Wild Turkey, Quail, Goose, 
Pheasant, Alligator, Ostrich and much more. 
Foie Gras, Russian Caviar, French Pate, 
European style meats 
For Catalog 1-919-972-7423 
Internotional Home Cooking 
305 Mallory St, Rocky Mounࢲ NC 27801 
Why are these people smiling? 
A. Ed McMahon just showed up at 
their door with a check. 
'r.' 
O 
B. The UPS driver just showed , -<J: 
';, 
at their door with a package 
"'--.-l: 
from CYBERSPICE. 
Call 1-800-455-9251 {or the answer or send 5.00 and 
receive 2 bUs. Cajun Chef La. Hot Sauce (red & 
green) and our brochure. 
CYBERSPICE FOODS 
P.O. Box 11116 Dept. FC, Denver, CO 80211 
89

--- Page 90 ---
COOK'S MARKET 
. 
, 
fze=='Sh' 
and Poultry. 
Gives Your Barbecue Personality! 
Trial size plus proven barbecue recipes. Send 
$4.95 to G.B.G., Box 1522, Ridgecrest, CA 93556 
Introductory Offer! 
Call today 1-800-233-5443 
a free catalog and receive a coupon 
for 20% off your first order 
Over 30 hard to f"md flavors 
co϶ϷϸϹ'?Ϻ-g./mϵ6'01ϻϼ2ϽϾ3Ͽlc;i'ec45Ѐ,Ёr;6ern 
Pecan Cream, English Toffee, Mexican Liqueur. 
Butternut Rum, and more. 
101 
GET IT 
\VHIbE ".co s ... ·• 
;::!@ 
,,4֐ ϴ..IM, 
4 - 6 oz. jars ..... $15 ppd. 
4503 Berkshire . +r,-:;";1-4;;./ (313) 882-2222 . MC/VISA/DISC 
.----;.'n'EP""_H. 
'\) 1\tLSUQ/ Ǹ Exot\Y 
Spice blends, herbal teas 
90 
Speciality Items 
A true OIlinary adventure ... 
For free catalog send SASE to: 
Herb '0' Lore 
11 Nadine Court, Thousand Oaks, CA. 
91320-4411 
499-7505 
VIDALlAGD ONION 
VINAIGRETTES 
PRICES START AT $12.95 
TWO 12-0Z. BomES 
ORDER TOLL FREE 
1-800-221-5050 
Solid Hard Rock malDle 
The 
Specializing in 
Mayhaw Southerll jelli֗ s, 
T 
sauces 81111 dreSSUIItS. 
ree,· CaU for FREE calaiug 
1-800-262-9429 
"The Best Jelly ill the Wodd" 
Cn';,lt fur (;ifl.o; 
'(!§;Oria 's 
pt:egars 
Rosl:1 M elcu'Lge 
M ocleftct Bctlsctmic 
Bctl1l:1 Dill Lemoft 
Fref'LCI'L Tctrmgoft 
ROl:1ctl RctSpl1errl:1 
Lemoftl:1 Pepper TI'Ll:1 me 
16. 75 oz. 
$12.00 
PO CBoJ( 127, If'reelioU{, JVtY 12431 
(800) 646-2059 
"Chitarra" 
Imported traditional Italian pasta cutter. 
Handmade from 
European 
Beech, Teak, 
brass and glass. Individually numbered and 
signed. Delicious recipes and instructions 
included. Send cheque or money order for $196 
incl. shipping to: 
FORM & FUNCTION 
402 W Wilson St. 
Monticello, Illinois 61856 
Tel. (217) 762-2445 
r - - - - - - - - - -)
-
I L!;r
1?or;e£!lmP!t fst !eĬĳtt. 
0009 
I 
I desserts and much more. Plus. great gourmet reci-
.... I 
pes! Learn the secrets and techniques ol lood 
• 
I preparation and serving. Diploma awarded. FREE 
• • 
I BROCHURE describes opportunities. No salesmen. 
• 
Write or call today! 1-800-326-9221 
I Lifetime qareer Schools, Dept. FT088S Accredited Member, Distance I 
L10֕ a=on֖ .. ::h':/f' ֑ '֒ 3 _ .;:u:;n .:.:֛= o =֔
 
LOOKING FORA 
COOKING SCHOOL? 
'ew Seventh Edition · 338 Pages 
You'll find it in IIJis 
co
mprehens
ive resource 
to over 8oo career ami 
vacat/OI' programs 
worldwide. 
Recom
melJded by 
Bon Appetit, Gounnet, 
The New York 1imes 
JuS! $22.95 ppd. 
ShawGuides 
Box 1295, NY, NY 10023 
Credit Cards call: 
(800) 247-6553 or 
Fax (419) 281-6883 
,.<$::£Sl:Ȩ 
THE ORIGINAL 
=>SSl>Slh 
Ƿ
tem Sfiore 
Gmbcc:il@s 
An elegant & easy dining solution. Our 
crabcakes started it alL Made by hand 
using the fmest Chesapeake Bay 
Crabmeat. All you do is heat & serve. 
Enjoy an Eastern Shore Tradition! 
• Fresh, shucked Oysters 
• Soft-shell Crabs . Shad & Shad Roe 
• Gift Packages & Certificates 
• Cookbooks · Aged Virginia Hams 
Please send me your free brochure 
֏
*
ī
Ud 
1129 Hope Rd .• 
Centerville, MD • 21617 
800-282-CRAB 
THE KNIFE 
YOU'LL REACH FOR 
CERAMIC ZIRCONIA BLADE 
MAKES CUTTING SILKY SMOOTH 
• Diamond-hard white Kyocera blade · Sharper 
than any steel edge · Lightweight and perfectly 
balanced · Stays razor sharp - never needs 
sharpening · One-year factory warranty 
• The ideal gift for the serious cook · 
5" All-Purpose Slicer $59֓ + $5 shp. 
Order now from: ShawGuides 
Box 1295, New York NY 10023 
Credit cards: (800) 247-6553 or Fax (419) 281 -6883 
fin 
WOKING 
New ideas . . . tested methods_ ._ 
great advice! 
Yours .. . in Fine Cooking magazine, the new 
food and cooking authority for people who 
love to cook. 6 issues, $26 a year (outside 
the U.S. $32, GST included). If at any time 
you aren't satisfied with Fine Cooking, we'll 
gladly refund your money in full. 
Subscribe Today, Risk Free. 
To order, call toll free 1-800-888-8286 and 
ask for operator 159. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 91 ---
OLD COUNTRY RECIPE 
TlUly the BEST SAUCE EVER!! 

MY great grandmother's pasta 
..;;;-
sauce easy to make and tastes 
• (;-' _ GREAT Send SAS.E. + $3.00 to 
-
--
.' 
Mama Nelcionll P.O. Box 60158 
Colorado Splings, Co. 80960 
Georgia Pecans & Peanuts 
NEW CROP / SHELLED / IN SHELL 
Gifts / FREE BROCHURE / Cooking 
SUN BURST FARMS 
Dept_ L, 352 Paul Sumner Rd_, Omega, GA 31n5 
TOLL FREE 1 -800-358-941 2 
Jamison Farm 
John & Sukey Jamison 
171 Jamison lane 
latrobe, PA 15650 
1 -800-237-5262 
"The Best lamb in America ! " TASTE T H E 
DIFFERENCE! To enjoy packages of legs, chops, 
racks, shanks, homemade stews or sauces, call 
for a free brochure. Raised and shipped directly 
from our farm. SPECIAL SUMMER GIFT package 
includes 1 leg of lamb & 8 lamb chops, gift card 
& recipe booklet. $75.00 + $8.00 s/h, VISNMC 
Creative Cooks Love 
Middlesex Farm's 
Natural, Low Fat Condiments 
• Orange & Hot Mustard 
2-time International Award Winner 
• Ginger Jazz 
Savory Grilling Glaze 
• Pepper Pizzaz 
Hot Pepper Jelly 
• Wow-ee Maui 
Pineapple Salsa 
FREE catalog and recipes plus a $5 gift certificate 
Middlesex Farm Food Products, PO Box 2470, Darien, CT 06820 
CALL 1 800 779-FARM 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
Pavlova Magic; 
A Perfect Meringue From A Mix 
Easy, Just Add Water & Sugar 
Mix and Bake 
Fat Free No Cholesterol 
Pavlova Magic and Soull1e Magic 
Epicurean Traders, P.o. Box 5107 
Newport Beach, CA 92662 
Or Call SOO-49Hr09 
UNSURPASSED QUALITY! $50-$250 
C]3(Qaesmitft's qnc. 
1028 1st. AVE. S SEATILE, WA 98134 (206) 623-1088 
LIFETIME GUARANTEE 
 
OJoltingCUidro 
• 
• 
UlS
tne 
Hosted by ChefSakul, 
graduate of Culinary Institute 
of America in New York. 
• 6 courses, easy to prepare. 
• Professionally produced. 
• $ 1 9_95 + $4.95 s/h, Visa/MC/AMEX 
Phloyds line up includes: 
Bar·B-Oue Sauce, Marinade, 
Dry Rub, Italian Mustard, 
Pepper Mustard and Pizza 
Dust. Phamous Phloyds 
phoods are sure to 
become your phavorites! 
Personalized gift 
packs for all occasIOns! 
Phamous Phloyds 
(303)757-3285 
(800)497-3281 
2998 South Steele St , Denver. CO 8021 0 
WORLD'S FINEST PEPPERCORNS 
No Preservatives! No Chemicals! 
Always FRESH .. Always Natural...The Absolute FINEST! 
Teliicherry (Gold Medal Winner) 3 oz. $6.75 
Montok White 3 oz. $6.75 Rainbow 3 oz. $7.25 
Pink 1 0z. $8.25 Green (Freeze dried) 1 oz. $9.00 
Include $3.50 8tH to: SEASON TO TASTE 
PO Box 302, Glens Falls, New York 1 2801 
• 
COOK'S MARKET 
Gourmet Seasoned Chicken Sausage 
All natural, low-fat, fully cooked. 
...c1.IJlI 
. Chicken with sun-dried 
tomatoes & basil 
• Chicken with spinach, 
garlic & fennel 
• 7 other healthy, unique 
and exciting varieties. 
All shipped factory direct. Free brochure. 
(5 1 8) 384- 1 889, Fax (5 1 8) 384- 1 86 1 . 
J)iscover 
.. 
small-balch 
I 
roasted quality. 
.. 
We use only the linest 
..., 
arabica beans 
ࢯ 
from around the 
X 
WOrld, and roast 
'-' 
and ship daily . 
I 
Free shipping is 
... 
provided when you 
register as an Armeno = 
llI1)IIǶNO 
Express customer and ֎ 
order 2 Ibs. or more of .... 
coffee each monlh. 
-
(ϲOIƅIƅlm 
"'ͥ
 .. 
(ࢮall today 
Ǵ 
UOllS'I'IϳUS 
for your FREE 
ࢭ 
catalog. 
"., 
1:1')) 
I 
1-800-ARMENO-1 
.. 
(1 -800-276-3661 ) 
• 
Gourmet 
Escargot 
qGOr 
i{| 
a--op ࢰ 
Shippedfresh 
ǵo1 t! GW ϰ f! on ice to your door, 
v-Qt1L • ϱ\r:vQ 
50 snails - $18.00• 100 snails - $32.00 
Plus shipping & handling! UPS next day air $20.ll!l 
MaslerCard 
Discover 
Free shipping & handling 
VISA 
with orders of 200 snails or more! 
To order call: 
(405) 225-2000 
• 
• 
BRIࢱ 
Reggiano Parmigiano - Aged over 3 yrs. 7.99 Ib, 
-:. 
Extra Virgin First Cold Pressed Olive Oil 
4.99 liter 13.99 gal. 
-:. 
Porcini Mushrooms - 10.00 Y.t lb., 20.00 Yi lb. 
Other Gounnet SpeCialty Items Available 
To order or for information and free brochure 
Teitel Brothers 
1-800-850-7055 Prices Plus StH 
91

--- Page 92 ---
COOK'S MARKET 
.ĩĪ;1: ' PHILLIP& ·.If'6:ti 
EXOTIC MUSHROOMS & ACCESSORIES 
ORDER FRESH EXOTIC MUSHROOMSI 
Porta bella, Crimini, Shiitake & Oyster 
FOR YOUR FREE CATALOG & GREAT GIFT IDEAS 
CALL · 1 ·800-AH-FUNGI 
Wiisthof-Trident 
6" Cook's Knife $M $39.95 
Professional 
Cutlery Direct 
(800) 859-6994 
Free catalogue of great savings on fine cutlery. 
Dept FC58K, 1 70 Boston Post Rd. St. 1 35, Madison, CT 06443 
ysrEzN 
CULINARY 
INSTITUTE 
WESTERN CULINARY INSTITUTE 
1 1 1 6 SW I ldlA .. n .. 
P
ortlon<l. 
OR ,nol 
(SOl) 221-2215 Of" (800) 666ͤ 11 2 
Professional chef training and culinary art pro­
gram Intensive 1 2-month program based on the 
principals of Escoffler with emphasis on modem 
techniques. Financial aid available for those who 
qualify, and VA approved. 
Call or write today for ࢬo", information 
and catalog. 
ADVERTISER INDEX 
CLASSIFIEDS 
The CLASSIFIED rate is $6.00/word, 
minimum 15 words. Payment must accompany 
order. Send to Fine Cooking Adv., Box 5506, 
Newtown, CT 06470·5506. 
October/November deadline is July 24, 1995. 
YOUR HOMEBREW STORE! THE BEV· 
ERAGE PEOPLE. Nationwide suppliers of the 
freshest ingredients for beer. 800·544· 1867. 
JOIN THE DISCOUNT COOKBOOK 
CLUB. Discounts on hundreds of cookbooks. 
Free recipes. 6 issues annually. Send $8: DC­
CFC, Box 23 1 28, Shawnee Mission, KS 
66223·3 1 28. 
EDIDLE FLOWERS FOR GOURMET 
COOKING. Fabulous gifts. Free recipes. 
$19.95 to Seabreeze Organic Farm, 3909 
Arroyo Sorrento, San Diego, CA 921 30. 
1 -800·48 1 ·0209. 
SOUTH BY SOUTHWEST CONNEC. 
TION . Spices, condiments, pies, gifts ... we'll 
find it! FREE catalog. 1 ·800·465·4500 Texas. 
GOURMET COOKING, THE BOTTOM 
LINE! Our booklet shows you how. $5, three 
weeks delivery. Eastman Enterprises, POB 2034, 
Fairfield Glade, TN 38558 800·913·9988. 
THE ITALIAN MARKET · All the food 
from our New York Italian neighborhood mar· 
ket direct to you. Catalog & orders 1 ·800· 
4MERCATO. 
Ale in a Pail 87 
Alos 19 
American Vintage 
Contadina 95 
Cooking with Flowers 
Lamson & Goodnow 1 3 
Le Boat 88 
and Flour 1 7 
W ine Biscuits 85 
Le Cordon Bleu 
Book, Video 1 1 
PAMPERED CHEF · Teach cooking classes to 
sell qualiry kitchen products. Set your own 
schedule. Training provided. Low investment, 
no inventory or deliveries. Member D.S.A. 
Betsy 612· 783·8787. 
LET THE GOVERNMENT FINANCE your 
food· related small business. Grants/loans to 
$500,000.00. Free recorded message: (707) 
448-0270. (FY8) 
1·800·562·0878 CHINA/CRYSTAL/FLAT. 
WARE. Matching Service for discontinued 
patterns. Box 508·F, High Ridge. MO 63049. 
LOCAL COOKBOOKS direct from nonprofit 
organizations · $5 directory. NPO Cookbook 
Direct'ry, Drawer 400, Huntingdon, PA 16652. 
FOOD WITH AN ATTITUDE! That's our 
motto atlekyll & Hyde. Try Picadillo, Mango 
Chutney, Champignon Glace or our A·maize· 
ing Salsa. (904)396-0847. All credit cards. 
AUTHENTIC WITH A TWIST · 6 easy 
Southwestern recipes. $7.00. Maria Luisa's, 
P'O.Box 1 3 1 7, Tijeras, New Mexico 87059. 
Fine Cooking Classifieds reach food and cook­
ing enthusiasts eager for information about spe· 
cialry food items, cookbooks, kitchen tools, 
table accessories · anything that adds to their 
pleasure in preparing, serving and eating good 
food. For more information call 1 ·800·926· 
8776, ext. 543. 
Professional Cutlery 
Direct 9 1 , 92 
Antique Mall & Crown 
Restaurant 85 
Arden's Gardens 90 
Armeno Coffee 91 
Cucina Classica 7 
Cyberspice 89 
Don Alfonso Foods 82 
Duhnke Furniture 90 
EarthStone Wood· Fire 
Lifetime Career Schools 90 
Los Capcos 82 
Rafal Spice Co. 89 
Replacements, Ltd. 89 
The School of Culinary 
Arts 1 7 
Scottsdale Culinary 
Elephant Brand Basmati Rice 5 
Beer and W ine Hobby 88 
Berres Brothers 90 
Bertolli Glive Oil 8, 9 
Bilinski's Mailbox Gourmet 9 1 
Bladesmith's Inc. 9 1 
The British Shoppe 89 
California W inemakers 
Guild 1 1 
Calphalon 1 1 
Capital Tours, Ltd. 89 
Chef Revival 2 1 
Chef's Catalog 1 3 
Chef's Collection 89 
Chefwear 85 
Chesapeake Express Ltd. 90 
Chile La Isla 89 
CND Marketing 89 
92 
Ovens 88 
Eden Foods 2 1 
Epicurean Traders 9 1 
Escargormet 9 1 
Fancy Foods Gourmet Club 1 7 
Form & Function 90 
Gregg's Seasoning 90 
Hawaiian Fine Coffee Co. 89 
Hendrix Farms 90 
Herb In' Lore 90 
II Contadino 89 
Int'l Home Cooking 89 
James Gerard Co. 88 
Jamison Farm 9 1 
Jesse Jones 89 
Jet Dry 2 
Josie Jo & Co. 89 
Maille Mustard 76 
Mama Nelcionii 91 
Mangia Software 8 1 
Mariner Tours 87 
Mayhaw Tree 90 
Middlesex Farm Food 
Products 9 1 
Muirhead 9 1 
Narrow Way Co. 83 
National Dairy Board 23 
National Pork Council 14, 1 5 
New England Culinary 
Institute 87 
New York Cake & Baking 
Distributor 83 
North West Mushroom Co. 89 
Peter Kump's N.Y. 
Cooking School 2 1 
Phamous Phloyd's 9 1 
Phillips Mushrooms 92 
Institute 83 
Season to Taste 91 
ShawGuides 90 
Shopper's Delight 88 
Somerset Gourmet Beef 85 
Sullivan College 8 1 
Sun Burst Farms 9 1 
Swissco Foods 88 
Teitel Brothers 9 1 
Thai Cuisine 9 1 
U. S . Personal Chef 8 3 
Upton Tea Imports 88 
Victoria's Vinegars 90 
The Victorian Cupboard 88 
Western Culinary 
Institute 92 
W indsor Vineyards 87 
Wolf Range Co. 17 
W iisthofKnives 87 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 93 ---
RECIPES 
COVER RECIPES 
Grilled Potato Salad 27 
Hazelnut-Mocha Ice Cream 72 
APPETIZERS 
Baba Ghanouj (Eggplant & 
tahini puree) 66 
Grilled Mushrooms with Sage, 
Parmesan & Prosciutto 27 
Hummus (Chickpea & 
tahini puree) 66 
Tabbouleh (Parsley & 
cracked-wheat salad) 66 
DESSERTS, CAKES lit 
PASTRY 
Caramel Sauce 72 
Dessert Bars: 
Chocolate Cream Cheese 
Brownies 49 
Chocolate Nut Bars 50 
Poppy Seed Bars 51 
Raspberry Bars 50 
Fresh & Dried Fruit Compote 42 
ICE CREAMS lit SORBETS 
Caramel Ice Cream with 
Toasted Almonds 72 
Hazelnut-Mocha Ice Cream 72 
Melon Sorbet 35 
Orange Ice Cream with Dried 
Cherries & Toasted Pecans 71 
Recipe (analysis per serving) 
Grilled Potato Salad 
MAIN DISHES 
Fish/Shellfish 
Melon, Mint & Watercress Salad 
with Salt-Cooked Snapper 34 
Poached Salmon with Sauce Verte 38 
Salmon with Summer Vegetables 39 
Sliced Salmon Salad 40 
Meat 
Kibbeh (Minced lamb with 
cracked wheat) 67 
PASTA 
Penne with Pepper , Fennel & Basil 29 
SALADS 
Melon, Mint & Watercress Salad 
with Salt-Cooked Snapper 34 
Mexican Melon Salad 34 
Tabbouleh (Parsley & 
cracked-wheat salad) 66 
SAUCES, CONDIMENTS lit 
SEASONINGS 
Chamberlain's Homemade 
Steak Sauce 61 
Classic Fresh Tomato Sauce 47 
Labne (Drained yogurt with mint) 68 
Puttanesca-Style Sauce 47 
Red Clam Sauce 47 
Roasted Garlic Puree 52 
Sauce Verte (Mayonnaise with 
spinach, herbs & capers) 38 
Tomato SaucĈ with Dried Porcinis 47 
Page 
27 
Calories 
total 
fat 
Protein Carb 
(g) 
(g) 
3 
27 
Grilled Mushrooms 
27 
280 60% 
180 74% 
210 74% 
550 38% 
9 2 
4 
14 
71 9 
20 
58 1 
Japanese Eggplant with Ginger Glaze 
28 
Penne with Peppers, Fennel &; Basil 
29 
Melon, Mint &; Watercress with Snapper 34 
Mexican Melon Salad 
34 
Melon Sorbet 
35 
Poached Salmon with Sauce Verte 
Salmon with Summer Vegetables 
Sliced Salmon Salad 
Fresh &; Dried Fruit Compote 
Classic Fresh Tomato Sauce 
Red Clam Sauce 
Puttanesca-Style Sauce 
Tomato Sauce with Dried Porcinis 
Chocolate Cream Cheese Brownies 
Raspberry Bars 
Chocolate Nut Bars 
Poppy Seed Bars 
Tabbouleh 
Hummus 
Baba Ghanouj 
Foullmdamis 
Loubieh Bziet 
Kibbeh 
Labne 
Orange Ice Cream with Cherries 
Caramel Ice Cream with Almonds 
Chocolate-Hazelnut Mocha Ice Cream 
38 
39 
40 
42 
47 
47 
47 
47 
49 
50 
50 
51 66 
66 
66 
67 
67 
67 
68 
71 72 
72 
75 10% 
100 18% 
220 
0% 
520 69% 
400 62% 
310 60% 
150 
0% 
90 58% 
190 33% 
150 72% 
110 47% 
150 58% 
180 47% 
160 61% 
130 59% 
180 74% 
200 57% 
140 60% 
220 40% 
120 51% 
250 38% 
25 48% 
330 60% 
390 70% 
400 69% 
17 
9 3 o 
38 
26 
25 
2 
20 3 2 3 2 2 2 2 
6 4 9 3 
26 
4 6 7 
13 6 
35 9 
13 
10 
14 
14 
24 
15 
12 
11 
19 
14 
26 
15 
11 2 
30 
25 
27 
The nutritional analyses have been calculated by a registered dietitian at The Food Consulting Company 
of San Diego, California. When a recipe gives a choice of ingredients, the first choice is the one used in 
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1995 
SIDE DISHES 
Foul lmdamis (Lebanese fava beans) 67 
Grilled Potato Salad 27 
Grilled Mushrooms with Sage, 
Parmesan & Prosciutto 27 
Japanese Eggplant with 
Sesame-Ginger Glaze 28 
Loubieh Bver (Green beans 
with onions) 67 
TECHNIQUES 
Controlling time & temperature 
for grilling vegetables 26 
Cooking steak 61 
Creaming butter & sugar 49 
Drying fresh produce 41-43 
Freezing dessert bars 49 
Grilling garlic 52; vegetables 25-28 
Measuring & cutting dessert bars 49 
Pairing beer & food 56--58 
Peeling & seeding tomatoes 46 
Poaching salmon, sliced 38; 
whole 38 
Preparing vegetables for 
grilling 25-28 
Roasting garlic 52-53 
Simmering tomato sauce 46 
Skinning poached salmon 38 
INGREDI ENTS 
Beef tenderloin, cooking 61; 
cutting steaks & roasts 60-61; 
trimming 60; trussing a roast 61 
INDEX 
Beer, pairing with food 56--58; 
pouring 58 
Chiles, uses for dried 43 
Court bouillon 36--38 
Garlic, selecting 52; roasting 52-53 
Flowers, uses for dried 43 
Fruits, uses for dried 43 
Herbs, fresh vs. dried 46; uses for 
dried 43 
Ice cream, about 69; adding 
flavorings 70, 72; churning 71; 
cooking the base 70-71 
Melons, choosing 32-34; 
varieties of 30-32 
Mushrooms, uses for dried 43 
Salmon, boning poached 39; 
poaching 36--38; skinning 
poached 38 
Skim milk powder in ice cream 70 
Tomatoes, for sauce 44-45; peeling 
& seeding 46; uses for dried 43 
Vegetables, grilling, controlling 
time & temperature 26; 
preparing 25-28 
TOOLS 
Dehydrators, sources for 42 
Flowerpots, for roasting garlic 52 
Grills 27 
Knives, for cutting beef 59 
Saucepots 44 
Terra-cotta garlic roasters 52 
NUTRITION INFORMATION 
total 
Fats (g) 
sat 
mona 
19 
3 
14 
15 
3 
10 
18 
2 
8 
23 
4 
14 
1.0 0 
0 
2.0 1.0 
0.5 
0 
0 
0 
40 
4 
21 
28 
4 
18 
20 
3 
12 
0 
0 
0 
6 
1 
4 
7 
1 
4 
12 
2 
8 
6 
1 
4 
10 
6 
3 
9 
4 
4 
11 
5 
3 
8 
3 
3 
15 
2 
11 
13 
2 
6 
9 
1 
3 
10 
1 
7 
7 
1 
5 
10 
3 
6 
1.5 1.0 
0.5 
22 10 
8 
30 16 
10 
31 15 
12 
poly 
2 1 6 3 0.5 
0 0 
12 5 4 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 2 2 1 5 4 1 1 1 0 2 2 2 
Chol 
(mg) o 
15 o 
60 
15 5 o 
105 
130 
60 o o 
45 5 o 
45 
25 
25 
20 o o o o o 
75 5 
145 
205 
180 
Sodium 
(mg) 
120 
780 
530 
500 
570 
225 
10 
650 
570 
850 5 
280 
360 
610 
280 
25 
10 
30 
25 
160 
340 
280 
780 
140 
460 
110 
65 
85 
90 
Fiber 
Notes 
(g) 3 
5 9 
4 
o 4 2 3 2 2 2 3 
1 3 4 6 7 5 2 
V2 cup serving 
o 1 Tbs. 
Yz cup serving 
V2 cup serving 
V2 cup serving 
the calculations. Optional ingredients and those listed without a specific quantity are not included. 
When a range of ingredient amounts or servings is given, the smaller amount or portion is used. 
93

--- Page 94 ---
TiDBITS 
( \"..-=)-'" 
The Green Bean War 
A1 dente is not a familiar term in southern 
vocabularies, and to use it in conjunction 
with green beans is to earn a sideways 
glance over your sudden lapse into a for­
eign language. So when I moved to Ken­
tucky from upstate New York, a staunch 
follower of Julia and a believer in the less­
is-more school of vegetable cooking, and 
then married a man from a large, tradi­
tional eastern Kentucky family, a disagree­
ment immediately ensued. In fact, it was 
more than a disagreement. It was a philo­
sophical rift between my haute cuisine ap­
proach to green beans and time-honored 
southern attitudes. Green beans came 
to symbolize the profound cultural dif­
ferences between us: me, over-educated, 
liberal Yankee career woman vs. him, 
conservative, traditional southern man. 
Rothko vs. Rockwell. Fruity Medocs vs. 
plain-speaking bourbon. And, most signi­
ficantly, slightly crunchy, glowing emerald­
green beans vs. boiled-for-hours-olive­
drab-not-even-green-anymore beans. 
When the subject of green beans arose 
during the first garden harvest of our mar­
riage, I assumed that my northeastern 
cooking style was greeted skeptically be­
cause of lack of familiarity. I airily told my 
husband, "Oh, you'll love Julia's method. 
Trust me." I gathered the slender beans 
from the garden, snapped off the ends, 
94 
washed them, and then steamed them for 
just a few minutes, long enough to set the 
emerald color and to slightly tenderize the 
pods. After plunging them in ice water, 
draining and drying them, I lightly sauteed 
them in butter, added salt, pepper, and lots 
of fresh parsley, and splashed them with 
fresh lemon juice. With all the fervor of a 
missionary winding up before a prime pros­
pect for conversion, I served those splen­
did beans and waited for the accolades. My 
I savored the velvety, 
smoky quality of these 
homely garden soldiers. 
Now I knew! 
This was bean-ness. 
husband dutifully poked them, chewed a 
few, and murmured, "They're all right. Not 
bad." He's a man oHew words, so that was 
high praise, I thought. 
The various bush and pole bean crops 
were diligently served up a 1a fraru;aise most 
of that summer. One afternoon, I came 
home from work to a large pot simmering 
on the stove. Pinkish-gray bacon drooped 
over a mass of olive softness, beans so 
cooked their pods had split. They looked 
awful, but I had to admit the aroma was 
promising, I wrinkled my nose and re­
marked, "I see we're doing southern to­
night." A noncommittal grunt was the 
response. I stuck a fork in the pot and 
tasted a few. "Not bad," I acknowledged. 
"They have good flavor." We had reached 
an impasse. Oh, we were polite. Neither 
criticized the other's cooking methods, but 
then neither openly, enthusiastically en­
dorsed the other's style. By some unspoken 
agreement, we simply alternated bean 
styles for the next few years. Gradually I 
stopped trying to make bush and pole vari­
eties behave in an undercooked state and 
capitulated to local ways. 
This past spring, no doubt feeling a little 
guilty over the issue, my husband planted 
Slenderettes, announcing that this variety 
would better suit my ways in the kitchen. 
He also put in rows of White Half-Runners, 
a strapping, muscular, stringed variety that 
requires some patience to ready for cook­
ing. I fixed the Slenderettes but felt they 
lacked any real character. Meanwhile, the 
Half-Runners seemed to explode, and we 
frantically canned or gave bushels to a 
neighbor who, for some reason, got very 
excited about them. But I wasn't anxious 
to try them and always found something 
else from the garden for dinner. 
One late August afternoon, my hus­
band fixed a large pot of Half-Runners. 
Stabbing a fork into the mess before din­
ner, I sampled the afternoon's pickings. 
Suddenly, I knew. What was this? I tasted 
more. And more. I rolled those beans 
around in my mouth, savoring the rich­
ness, the depth, the stunning, velvety, 
smoky quality of those homely garden sol­
diers. Now I knew! This is what green 
beans were all about. This was bean-ness. 
You can hybridize the varieties, you can 
engineer the strings away and mandate the 
shape, size, and maturity date, but some 
things cannot be improved. No green 
beans have ever tasted better to me. 
I haven't completely abandoned Julia. 
This spring I'll insist on a packet of mini 
filet bean seeds. But I'll also look forward 
to real Kentucky green beans-lovingly 
boiled with onion, bacon, salt, pepper, and 
the right attitude. And I might just have 
some bourbon before dinner. 
-Harriet W Fowler, 
Nicholasville, Kentucky • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 95 ---
ntadina. Why ravioli were meant 
to be eaten one at a time. 
© 1995 Nestle 
C o n t a d i n a 
N o matter w h i ch vari ety of Conta d i n a ravi o l i you choose, you ' l l 
discover a taste of pure bliss that begs to be savored slowly. Whether 
it's our new Gorgonzola Cheese & Wa lnut, Chicken & Rosemary, Beef 
& Garlic, Light Garden Vegetable or classic Ch eese raviol i , each is 
p repa red from a n origi n a l rec i p e created by t h e ch efs at Casa 
_--- Buiton i , the Contadina cu l i n a ry a rts center i n Tusca ny, lta ly. 
And , l i ke a l l our refrigerated pastas, Contadina raviol i are always 
fres h l y made for a tenderhearted taste that's h a rd to resist. 
T fr e f r e s fr e s t i d e a s
I n I t a I i a n c o o k i n g:"

--- Page 96 ---
New flour from old millstones 
This reproduction of an eighteenth-century gristmill was hand built by Ken and Dora 
Moore for their flour mill and bakery in Ukiah, California. The mill pairs two 100-year-old 
grindstones (one shown, one encased below it) with new PVC grain-delivery pipes to 
grind up to 50 pounds of flour per hour. The Moores grind all their flour with this gristmill. 
Grain flows from a loft through the 
pipes to a hopper on top of the mill. 
The hopper channels the grain into 
the center of the top millstone, 
which spins against a stationary 
bottom stone. 
The ground flour spins out to the 
This old· fashioned gristmill works daily to grind wheat, com, rye, and oats into flour, which is baked into bread and sold 
edges of the stones and falls down a 
at the Moore's bakery. 
chute, filling a cloth sack.