--- Page 1 ---
TAUNTON'S 
PERFECTING 
PIZZA CRUST 
THE MAINE 
LOBSTER 
MAKING 
A GREAT 
SHORTCAKE 
VEGETABLES 
AS THE 
MAIN DISH 
JUNE / JULY 1 994 NO.3 
FOR PEOPLE WHO LOVE TO COOK

--- Page 2 ---
T
H
E
 Y O U N G 
C 
H 
E F S
O
N
 
U M B E R 
S 
I X 
I N 
A 
S 
E R I 
E 
S. 
"Butter Makes Almost Every Food Taste Better!' 
Chef David Burke, Park Avenue Cafe, NYC 
"That's what makes it so wonderful. 
Butter can tum boiled carrots into 
delicious glazed carrots. Here's how I do it. 
I boil and drain fresh carrots, saute them with 
a little of the cooking water, then stir in a few 
pats of butter. They taste great. Try it yourself 
at home. It's easy. 
If you love preparing delicious food, 
remember this tip: a little butter adds a lot 
of flavor." 
NOTHING BRINGS OUT THE TASTE LIKE 
BUTTER 
America's Dairy Farmers 6 © National Dairy Board 1994

--- Page 3 ---
fine 
JUNE/JULY 1994 ISSUE 3 
DEPARTMENTS 
4 Letters 
6 Q&A Re-lining copper 
pans, freezing bread, white 
vs. black pepper, using leek 
tops, dairy-free cooking 
10 Notes Balsamic vinegar, 
campaigning for pesticide­
free food, the Wonder Cup 
1 2 Food Science 
Controlling bacteria in food 
through temperature 
16 Tips Drying and storing 
lettuce, cooling stock 
quickly, cutting cheesecake 
72 Basics Trussing a roast, 
segmenting citrus fruit 
74 Reviews 
How-to-cook books 
78 Calendar 
80 Flavorings 
Worcestershire sauce 
85 Advertiser Index 
85 Recipe Index 
86 Tidbits 
On the cover: A Thai Menu, p. 20; 
Shortcakes, p. 66. 
Cover photo, Susan Kahn; inset, Robert Marsala. 
Photos [his page: rop. RlUh Lively; center, Martha 
Holmberg; bottom, Suzanne Roman. 
ARTICLES 
20 The Vibrant Art of Thai Cooking 
by Arun Sampanthavivat 
A variety of flavors, textures, and colors make a meal sparkle 
26 Creating Perfect Pizza Crust by Gay Chanler 
Thin or thick, crisp or chewy-it's all in how you treat the dough 
Pizza toppings 29 
30 A Fresh Look at Sautes by Jean-Charles Berruet 
A French chef puts his contemporary spin on classic methods 
35 Vegetables Make the Meal by Kaysey McLoughlin 
Meatless main dish pleases the palate and the eye 
Vegetable stock from peelings and parings 37 
38 Making Flavorful Fruit Butters and Cheeses 
by Amanda Burton 
Old-fashioned preserves for health-conscious cooks 
42 Jamaican .. Style Barbecue by Jay B. McCarthy 
Making and using hot and spicy "jerk" 
46 Tum Yogurt into Cheese by Anne Sterling 
How can something so easy be so good-and low in fat, too? 
48 A Passion for Lobster by Sam Hayward 
A Maine chef captures all the flavor from these expensive crustaceans 
54 Beyond Plain Pork by Hartmut Handke 
A summer-vegetable stuffing adds moistness and flavor 
58 Savoring Some Sweets of the Vine by Robert Feinn 
As aperitifs or after-dinner treats, these sweet wines make a meal great 
61 Smoking Fish at Home by Jay Harlow 
Three simple methods for kitchen or yard 
Serving hot5smoked fish 64 
66 More Than Strawberry Shortcakes by Shannon McKinney 
How to make the best shortcake ever and adapt it to your taste 
Fine Cooking (ISSN 1072-5121) is published bimonthly by T he Taunton Press, Inc., Newtown, CT 06470-5506. Tel. 203/426-8171. Application to mail at second-class postage 
rates is pending at Newtown, CT 064 70 and at additional mailing offices. GST paid registration # 123210981. U.S. distribution by ICDlThe Hearst Corporation, 250 West 
55th St., New York, NY lOOl9and Eastern News Distributon;, Inc., 1130 Cleveland Rd., Sandusky, OH 44870. 
26 Perfecting Pizza 
30 Updated Sautes 
48 Lobster 
Postmaster: Send address changes to Fine Cooking, T he Taunton Press, Inc., 63 South Main Street, PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506. Printed in the USA

--- Page 4 ---
LETTERS 
We invite you to share your thoughts, 
opinions, and comments with fellow 
readers. Please send your cards or 
letters to Letters, Fine Cooking, PO Box 
5506, Newtown, CT 06470-5506 . 
BAKING CHEMISTRY 
Cynthia Hariu of Lynbrook, NY, asked 
for more on the chemistry of cooking. 
Two sources I've found helpful are Practi­
cal Baking, 5th Edition, by William J. Sul­
tan, and the King Arthur Flour 200th 
Anniversary Cookbook. The latter also 
has a small bimonthly newsletter called 
"The Baking Sheet." 
-Gayle Gookin, Loveland, CO 
Editor's note: If these books are unavail­
able locally, you can order Practical Bak­
ing by calling 800/842-3636 and King 
Arthur by calling 800/827-6836. 
WEIGHT AND MEASUREMENT 
I enjoy flour-based recipes for things like 
bread and pasta, but would you consider 
stating the weight of the ingredients in 
these recipes? 
-Rob Bruno, Huntington Beach, CA 
Editor's n ote: We share Mr. Bruno's 
concern for accuracy in measuring dry 
ingredients used in baking and pastry 
making. Measuring ingredients like 
flour, cornstarch, or chopped nuts by 
volume (with a measuring cup) is not al­
ways accurate because the ingredient 
may take up more or less volume de­
pending on how compact or aerated it 
is. Measuring by weight (with a scale) 
should give you the precise amount of 
each ingredient each time you measure. 
Because not every cook owns a scale, 
we will list the weight (in ounces or 
pounds) and the volume ( in tablespoons 
or cups) for dry ingredients in recipes in 
which they play a critical role. We will 
not include weight measure where pre­
cision is less important, however, such as 
for flour used for dredging or chopped 
nuts for decoration. 
MORE GLUTEN TIPS 
To follow up Prof. Ponte's gluten article 
(Food Science, Fine Cooking #1), here's 
additional information about two aspects 
of gluten that affect cooks: how gluten­
forming proteins absorb water, and how 
4 
sugar interferes with gluten formation. 
When proteins in flour join with each 
other and water, they form gluten. This 
means a high-protein flour will absorb 
much more water than a low-protein 
flour. It takes about 2 cups of high­
protein flour to absorb 1 cup of liquid, 
while it takes about 2Y2 cups of low-pro­
tein flour to absorb 1 cup of liquid. 
(Cooks have known for thousands of 
years that one flour absorbs more water 
than another, but this frequently was 
blamed on humidity.) This difference be­
tween flours' water-absorbing qualities 
can create problems in writing and fol­
lowing recipes. 
If there's a lot of sugar in a dough, 
gluten-forming proteins will combine with 
the sugar instead of each other. When a 
yeast dough contains more than 2 table­
spoons of sugar for every cup of flour, the 
bread will be heavy because the gluten 
hasn't formed a good network in which to 
capture enough gases from the yeast to 
rise properly. On the positive side, sugar's 
gluten-interfering qualities also make 
cakes and pie crusts more tender. 
-Shirley 0. Corriher, Atlanta, GA 
ERRATA 
• In the recipe for Lemon Sponge Cake 
in a Roasted-Almond Crust (Fine Cook­
ing #1, p. 70), the cake flour and corn­
starch volume measurements were incor­
rect. The correct quantities are: 
2୆ oz. (l.2 cup plus 2 Tbs.) cake flour 
2 oz. (l.2 cup plus 1 Tbs.) cornstarch 
• The telephone number for Mo Hotta­
Mo Betta on p. 34 of Fine Cooking # 1 was 
incorrect. The correct phone number is 
800/462-3220 . • 
Fine Cooking is looking for an 
associate editor with a strong cook­
ing background and experience in 
editing and writing. Editor will 
travel frequently to work with 
authors. Photographic skills a plus. 
We offer a competitive salary, ex­
cellent benefits, and a pleasant 
work environment. Send a letter 
and resume to Personnel Depart­
ment, The Taunton Press, 63 S. 
Main St., Newtown, CT 06470. 
Publisher/Editor Jan Wahlin 
Art Director Steve Hunter 
Managing Editor Martha Holmberg 
Assistant Editors 
Suzanne Roman, Dana Harris 
Copy/Production Editor Li Agen 
Editorial Secretary Kim Landi 
Contributing Editor Ruth Rohde Lively 
Recipe Tester Abigail Johnson Dodge 
Design Director Susan Edelman 
Editorial Director John Lively 
Circulation Coordinator Sarah Roman 
Public Relations Manager Donna Pierpont 
Advertising Manager Tom Leihbacher 
Advertising Accounts Manager Doris Hanley 
Advertising Sales Coordinator Nancy Crider 
Marketing Secretary Christine Ferguson 
How to contact The Taunton Press: 
Telephone: 
Fax: 
Subscriptions: 
Orders: 
Customer Service: 
Advertising Sales: 
Retail Sales: 
800/283-7252 
203/426-8171 
203/426-3434 
800/888-8286 
800/477-8727 
8001283-7252 x 547 
8001283-7252 x 238 
Copyright 1994 by The Taunton Press, Inc. No reproduction 
without permission of The Taunton Press, Inc. Fine Cooking­
is a registered trademark of The Taunton Press, Inc. 
Subscription rates: U.S. and possessions, $26 for one year, 
$42 for two years, $58 for three years; other countries, $32 for 
one year, $52 for two years, $72 for three years (in U.S. 
dollars, please). Single copy, $4.95. Single copies outside U.S. 
and possessions, $5.95. Address correspondence to the 
appropriate department (Subscription, Editorial, or 
Advertising). The Taunton Press, 63 South Main St., PO 
Box 5506, Newtown, CT06470-5506. 
Writing an article 
Fine Cooking welcomes articles, pro­
posals, manuscripts, photographs, 
and ideas from our readers, amateur 
or professional. We'll acknowledge all 
submissions, return those we can't 
use, and pay for articles we publish. 
Send your contributions to Fine 
Cooking, PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 
06470-5506. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 5 ---
Now you can electronically 
keep up with the latest recipe 
and health trends found in 
newspapers or magazines. 
Turn your home PC into an 
efficient "ELECTRONIC 
COOKBOOK" 
Don't cut them, scan them. 
Articles are captured by your PC 
with the help of a scanner, then 
directly displayed on the monitor. 
By utilizing Pressman's layout 
function you can keep an 
"electronic scrapbook" by 
electronically cutting and pasting 
articles as you'd like. This versatile 
layout function makes Pressman 
ideal for articles that continue over 
several pages. 
Storage is indexing made simple. 
No need to type a single word. 
Articles are indexed using up to 
24 fields that are managed by a 
powerful database. 
Built-in OCR - Optical Character 
Recognition routines can transfer 
text directly to your word proces­
sing program. 
Retrieval is the easy part. Search 
on any previously entered des­
criptions and click OK. 
A result list with all the potential 
clippings using these keywords 
appears. A mouse click displays 
each article in its original form. 
Another click lets you print or fax 
out the one you need. 
It's that EASY! 
Systems Requirements 
• PC·386, Windows 3.1, Mouse 
• Supported Scanners: Logitech 
Scan Man 32, Artec parallel port 
scanner, TWAIN compatibility or 
imported PCX, BMP and TIFF files 
Functions 
• Scan, display, print, fax, import or 
export files 
• Compression according to CCITT 4 
• Layout (cut and paste, scaling) 
• Database keyword administration 
• OCR to any word processor 
• Full-text retrieval 
• Text highlighting and text annotation 
• Database menu generator 
Technical Data 
• TIFF compressed files 
·30 KB per letter size article (approx.) 
ALOS 
For Professional FiUng Solutions 
DocuWare PRESSMAN * DocuWare 3.0 * DocuWare COLD * DocuWare BARCODE 
ADVERTISED SPECIAL 
Place your order by calling: 
(800) 431-7105 
and say you saw it in this issue. 
PRESSMAN incl. 
Us! 
tnooducIory 
Price 
Price 
Handheld Scanner '595 '395' 
PRESSMAN 
Software ONLY 
'470 '295' 
'Call ALOS today to take advantage 
of this limited time offer. 
Toll Free: (800) 431-7105 
ALOS Micrographics Corporation 
118 Bracken Rd., Montgomery, NY 12549 
Phone (914) 457-4400 
Fax 1914) 457-9083 
We Accept MasterCard/Visa 
5

--- Page 6 ---
Q&A 
Have a question of general interest 
about cooking? Send it to Fine Cooking, 
PO Box 5506, Newtown, CT 06470-
5506, and we' ll try to find a cooking or 
food professional with the answer. 
FREEZING B READ 
Do nutrient levels in bread decrease 
when it's frozen? 
-Barbara Van Kirk, Roxbury, CT 
Jane Davis replies: Proteins and carbo­
hydrates in breads will not degrade by 
freezing, though the vitamin levels may 
be diminished. Freezing protects fatty 
elements in bread, like wheat germ, 
nuts, and cheese, keeping them from 
becoming rancid. Freezing also slows 
bread's staling process. When baked 
goods leave the oven, the water trapped 
by the baking process continues to 
evaporate, but the speed at which this 
happens depends on the ambient tem­
perature. Bread, especially a handmade 
yeast bread, will keep well at room tem­
perature for days, but for longer keep­
ing, the freezer is far better than a re­
frigerator. Refrigerators (at about 40°F) 
will quicken the staling process and 
your bread will dry out fast. 
Jane Davis owns Ganache, a bakery in 
Evanston, Illinois. 
WHITE VS. B LACK PEPPER 
I know black and white pepper have 
different flavors, but do they come from 
the same plant? 
-Lynn Harris, Fort Worth, TX 
Carol Ann Rinzler replies: Peppercorns 
are berries from the tropical vine Piper 
nigrum. Black peppercorns are berries 
that are picked before ripening and then 
dried. White peppercorns are mature 
berries that are soaked in water and 
stripped of their dark outer covering be­
fore being dried. 
The two peppers have slight differ­
ences in taste and aroma. Beyond taste, 
however, the pepper you use also comes 
down to a matter of aesthetics. Many 
cooks think white pepper looks more at­
tractive and less distracting than black 
pepper on light-colored dishes, such as 
poached fish or white sauces. 
Incidentally, all peppercorns are at 
their best when freshly ground in a met­
al pepper mill. Wooden mills absorb 
peppercorn oils, which may create a 
residue that is impossible to clean. Plas­
tic mills also absorb oils but are some­
what easier to clean. 
Carol Ann Rinzler is the author of 13 books 
on food and health, including The Com­
plete Book of Herbs, Spices, and Condi­
ments (Facts on File, 1990). 
DAIRY-FREE COOKING 
I have a severe allergy to all milk prod­
ucts. Can you help me find recipes that 
are milk-free, but not vegetarian or 
meat-and-potatoes? 
-Joan Tatum, Piketon, OH 
Nach Waxman replies: Two useful 
dairy-free books are The Milk-Free 
Kitchen, by Beth Kidder, and The Dairy­
Free Cookbook, by Jane Zukin. Each book 
has its own virtues. The Milk-Free Kitchen 
(H. Holt & Co., 1991. $16.95, softcover; 
480 pp. ISBN 0-8050- 1836-0) generally 
has stronger and more interesting 
recipes-some 450 of them, including 
many baking recipes. As a cookbook, 
Zukin's Dairy-Free Cookbook (Prima, 
199 1 . $ 14.95, softcover; 300 pp. ISBN 
1 -55958-088-7) is not as satisfying, but it 
offers 75 pages of extremely helpful intro­
ductory material, including charts, sup­
pliers, a discussion of causes and strate­
gies, and so forth. I would suggest that 
either be used primarily as a guide to 
cooking methods. These books provide 
many tips, tricks, and substitutions that 
may be all you need to convert the 
recipes you already know and love. 
There's no reason to disregard many of 
your old favorites. 
Nach Waxman is the owner of Kitchen Arts 
& Letters, a Manhattan bookstore devoted 
to books about food and cooking. 
RE-liNING COPPER PANS 
I have some heavy pans in which the tin 
lining has worn away and the copper is 
showing through. Should I have them 
re-lined? Where can I have this done, 
and how much might it cost? Is it un­
healthy to cook with copper exposed? 
-Grace Low, Eugene, OR 
J udie Hansen replies: Copper is un­
b/eatable for cooking because it con­
ducts heat so evenly. Tin-lined pans are 
wonderful, but the lining may be 
harmed by temperatures higher than 
405°F, or by long use. You should have 
your pans retinned because exposed 
copper can be toxic. 
The cost of retinning is about half the 
cost of a new pan. Any silversmith 
should be able to provide this service. 
Look in the Yellow Pages, or call the best 
cookware store in your area and see 
whom they recommend. In the future, 
Taunton 
PUBLICATIONS 
for fellow enthusiasts 
T he Taunton Press: Paul Roman, chairman; Janice A. 
Roman, president; John Lively, editor in chief & vice 
preSident; Carolyn Kovaleski, administrative secretary. 
Personnel: Catol Maroni, manager; Linda Ballerini, 
Christine Lincoln. Accounting: Wayne Reynolds, 
controller; Patrick Lamontagne, manager; Jeffrey 
magazines. Video: Craig Umanoff, Thomas Menard. Corporate Marketing: Peter Chidsey, 
director; Sarah Roman. Corporate Trade Sales: Dale Brown, director; Thomas Johnson, 
Barbara Buckalew, Donna Weinstein, Donna Pierpont, Diane Patterson, Marcie Seigel. 
Fulfillment & Operations: Thomas Luxeder, director; Jane Torrence. Client Services: 
Patricia Williamson, manager; Carolyn Arneth, Megan Sangster. Subscriber Services: Patricia 
Malouff, manager; Penny Lefferts, Karen Lewis, Barbara Smith, Siri W heeler. Order 
Processing: Joyce Me William, manager; Dawn Bartram, Barbara Lowe, Marylou Thompson. 
Darn Entry: Carole Ando, manager; Concetta Barczak, Bonnie Beardsley, Margaret Fainer, 
Madelaine Frengs, Marie Pato, Andrea Shorrock, Denise Zor. Distribution: Paul Seipold, 
manager; Grace Aumuller, David Blasko, Michael Capalbo, James Chappuis, Mary Ann 
Costagliola, Maureen Flynn, Linnea Ingram, Frederick Monnes, Marcia Pelillo, Alice 
Saxton, Astor Taylor, Robert Weinstein. Purchasing & Facilities: William Schappert, 
manager; Christopher Myers, Lois Beck, Cynthia Carroll, Sarah Hillard, Charles Hollis, 
Arthur Williams, Susan Nerich, John Dziadik, Oscar Garranza. Cofeterio.: Donna Freeman, 
manager; Geraldine Benno, Norma-Jean Taylor. Data Processing: Brendan Bowe, Roger 
Seliga, Arthur Caron, Gabriel Dunn. PC Systems: Heidi Waldkirch, manager; Robert 
6 
Sherman, Mary Sullivan, Andrea DuBois, Carol Diehm, 
Dorothy Blasko, Susan Burke, Lawrence Rice, Gayle Hammond, Judith Rivera, Lydia 
Krikorian, Elaine Yamin. Corporate Design: Susan Edelman, director. Promotion: Philip 
Allard, manager; D. J. Arneson, Wendy Bowes, Christopher Casey, Julia Brine, Mary Beth 
Cleary, Francesca Arminio, Donna Confalone. Book Art/Production: Robert Olah, manager; 
Henry Roth, Catherine Cassidy, Jodie Delohery, lIiana Koehler. Book Copy(Production: Ruth 
Dobsevage, manager; Peter Chapman, Pamela Purrone. Manufacturing: Kathleen Davis, 
director. Prepress: Austin Starbird, managerj Robert Marsala, Chansam Thammovongs3, 
Patricia Sigetti, Deborah Cooper, Richard Booth, Mark Coleman, William Godfrey, Laurene 
Jakab, Lisa DeFeo, Margot Knorr, Monica Murphy. Print Production: Dee Flanagan, Lynda 
Morris, promotion; Thomas Greco, Deborah Baldwin, books; Philip VanKirk, Tracie Pavlik, 
eilsen, J. Larry Kinnear, Laurie Yeager, Rebecca Fanning. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 7 ---
The ultimate way to cook. 
The unique radiant heat system of the 
classic British·built AGA Cooker produces 
results other stoves simply cannot match. 
It both simplifies and enhances the 
ways you can cook. The radiant heat seals 
in juices, flavors, and nutrients. Roasts 
stay tender and moist without basting, 
sauces and stew rich without stirring. 
Multi·course meals are quicker and easiel; 
need less attention. 
Among knowledgeable cooks, the AGA 
Cooker is the most capable, most versatile 
stove in the world. 
There's more to tell you. Just send $2 
to AGA Cookers, FC64. l7 TOIvne Farm Lane, 
Stowe. VT 05672. Or call 802·253·9727. 
California's 
w:!!!;/ 
Delivered To 
Your Door 
Savor the best new wines 
from California's 
"undiscovered" wineries. 
When you subscribe, you will 
receive monthly two different 
bottles of premium "limited 
availability" wines from one of 
California's 'undiscovered' 
wineries. Our wine taster scours 
the California vineyards to find 
the best new small wineries that 
are producing outstanding quality 
wines in limited quantities. You 
will also receive our exclusive 
newsletter, introducing you to the 
wines and their winery. 
Additional quantity orders 
at discount prices. 
Gift subscriptions available. 
Only $26.50 per month 
delivered to your home or office 
You may cancel anytime 
"Your direct connection to the 
Winemakers of California" 
Special Offer: for the readers of Fine 
Cooking 3 bottles for the price of 2 in 
your first shipment, plus an additional 
gift when you mention this ad. 
1 800 858 WINE 
(9463) 
Visa· MC - Discover 
Call 24 Hours 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
7

--- Page 8 ---
Q&A 
you could buy stainless-steel-lined cop­
per pans, which cost about twice as 
much, but don't wear out like tin-lined 
pans do. 
Judie Ha.nsen is the assistant to the owner of 
Sur La Table, a cookware and kitchen­
supply store in Seattle, Washington. 
RICOTTA SALATA 
On restaurant menus and in some 
recipes, I keep seeing "ricotta salata." 
What is it and how do you use it? 
-C. Bender, Culver City, CA 
Paula Lambert replies: Ricotta salata 
is a dry, firm ricotta that's good for grat­
ing over salads and pasta dishes. It's typi­
cally an Italian sheep's-milk ricotta 
that's salted, pressed, drained of most of 
its moisture, and aged until it is hard and 
develops a sharp, piquant flavor. It has a 
dry consistency, no rind, is very white, 
and cylindrical in shape. It has a distinc­
tive sheep's-milk flavor somewhat simi­
lar to pecorino romano. 
8 
The name "ricotta" comes from the 
Presents from GEORGIA, home of 
The Blue Ridge Mountains and 
"sweet" Vidalia Onions. 
Vidalia Onion Barbecue Sauce, 
Mustard, Relish & Salad Dressing. 
A Quartet of Gounnet Condiments 
with the graceful flavor of 
Vidalia Onions. 
ORDER NOW 
(800) 706-4438 
Call today for a Free Catalog and find out 
about dozens of delicacies fiom 24 states! 
Italian word that means "to recook." 
Ricotta is made from whey that remains 
after cheese curds are either separated 
or drained. The whey is reheated (or "re­
cooked") to become ricotta. When 
made from whey alone, true Italian ri­
cotta is an excellent low-fat cheese. 
American ricotta, however, often made 
from cow's milk, and has a higher milk­
fat content. 
Paula Lambert is the founder and president of 
The Mozzarella Company in Dallas, Texas. 
HOW TO USE LEEK TOPS 
Many recipes for leeks implore you to 
save the leek tops for soup. How should 
I use them? 
-Peter Lindsay, Toronto, ON 
Lucia Watson replies: You can simmer 
and puree fresh leek tops with other 
vegetables for any smooth soup in which 
you'd like the leek's green color and mild 
onion flavor. You also can use chopped 
leek tops in soups such as chicken lemon­
grass or beef vegetable. 
Fresh leek tops also make a great ad­
dition to the stockpot. Add them to fresh 
aromatic vegetables (carrots, celery, 
onions), some herbs, whole unpeeled 
garlic, and perhaps a handful of dried 
beans (for body) . Make the stock in any 
amount, but the water level should just 
cover the vegetables you're using. After 
the stock simmers for about an hour, 
strain it. The stock is ready to use. Unlike 
its source vegetables, the stock freezes 
very well-and it's much handier to have 
a freezer full of frozen stock than frozen 
vegetable scraps. 
While fresh leek tops can contribute 
to soup, either as an actual ingredient or 
when used in the stock, frozen leek tops 
will do you no good at all. A defrosted 
leek top is a slimy thing, which only can 
make for a slimy product. 
Lucia Watson is the chef and owner of 
Lucia's Restaurant in Minneapolis, Min­
nesota. Her cookbook, Savoring the Sea­
sons of the Northern Heartland, will be 
published by the Knopf Cooks American 
series this October. • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 9 ---
JUNE/JULY 1994 
INSPIRED BY HISTORIC 19TH CENTURY RECIPES & DESIGNS 
FLOWER & HERB VINEGARS 
• PRESERVES & JELLIES • FRUITS IN LIQUEUR 
• SCONE MIXES • SAVOURIES 
BEAUTY & GROOMING AIDS 
ONE-OF-A-KIND HOME ACCESSORIES & SUNDRIES 
Write or call for free catalog: 
THE VICTORIAN CUPBOARD Catalog, 
ō 
P.O. Box 1852, Old Chelsea Station, NY 10113; 
Ŏ 
4 
1-800-653-8033 
-t-
Ō,----
ŏ
 
Th, Stat, That Cr,at,d Th, Appl' 
Now Produc,s Am'rica1s Pr,mium 
Őarm,d Salmon. 
The fanners of Washington state bring you superior Atlantic 
salmon, p
rocessed 
and shipped fresher and faster to 
markets around the U.S. and the Far East. 
Gall now for a list of producers and fresh ideas for 
promoting and 
merch
andising Washington Farmed Salmon. 
a 
... .. 
WASHINGTON FARMED SALMON COMMISSION 
P.O. Box 5l05/B,IUnqham, WI galll 
(l06) 611-19911 fiX (Z06) 611-ll11 
9

--- Page 10 ---
NOTES 
Measuring Gooey Stuff 
Sticky, gloppy ingredients, such as honey, 
peanut butter, and shortening, are a pain 
to measure in conventional measuring 
cups. Not so in the Wonder Cup. Simply 
adjust the plastic base to make the Won­
der Cup the volume you want to mea­
sure, pour or spoon the ingredient into 
the cup, and level off the top. Now for 
the fun part: holding the cup securely 
with one hand, push on the base with the 
other-the gooey substance shoots right 
out. A lip on the sliding base keeps the 
cup from leaking, and it also scrapes the 
sides clean, so there's little left on the cup 
to wash off. 
Of course, the Wonder Cup measures 
liquids and dry ingredients, too (in cups, 
fluid ounces, tablespoons, teaspoons, and 
milliliters). You can buy the Wonder Cup 
from the manufacturer, Milmour Prod­
ucts, Inc., 8022 Ridgeway, Skokie, IL 
60076; 708/676-3260. The one-cup 
measure is $2.69, and a two-cup version 
is $4. 10 (minimum order is $ 10). The 
King Arthur Flour Baker's Catalogue 
(800/827-6836) also carries both sizes. 
-Suzanne Roman, Fine Cooking 
Campaigning for 
Pesticide, Free Food 
Frustrated that your local supermarket 
doesn't carry more organic foods? Won­
der what pesticides are on the produce 
your store does carry ? Send for the 
Mothers & Others Shoppers' Campaign 
for Better Food Choices Campaign Kit 
10 
for suggestions on what you can 
do about these issues. 
Mothers & Others for a Liv­
able Planet is a national con­
sumer organization helping par­
ents act on environmental 
issues that affect their fami­
lies. The organization is 
working to forge consumer 
support for a shift from 
chemical-intensive farming 
to sustainable farming. 
Mothers & Others launched 
the Shoppers' Campaign to 
increase market demand for, 
and consumer access to, sus­
tainably grown food that's 
free of dangerous pesticides. 
The Campaign Kit tells 
you how to gamer community 
support and approach the super-
market management to get the store to 
stock more locally grown and organic 
foods. The kit contains materials to 
leave with the manager and produce 
buyer, including marketing tips from suc­
cessful mainstream merchants who car­
ry organic foods, information on pesti­
cides that pose high risk to children, and 
a list of organic suppliers with which the 
store can work. 
The kit is available for $3 from 
Mothers & Others, 40 W 20th St., New 
York, NY 1001 1 ; 2 12/727-4474. Mothers 
& Others also publishes a bimonthly 
newsletter, timely legislative alerts, and 
the book The Way We Grow: Good-Sense 
Solutions for Protecting Our Families from 
Pesticides in Food. 
-Suzanne Roman, Fine Cooking 
Balsamic Vinegar 
Balsamic vinegar has become an in­
creasingly popular condiment for its 
woody, sweet-tart flavor, but you may 
not know what "real" balsamic vinegar 
tastes like. Made from concentrated 
white grape juice and aged in wooden 
barrels for at least twelve years, artisan­
quality balsamic vinegar is fine enough 
to sip as a liqueur. A tiny flask of "true" 
balsamic vinegar from the Italian re­
gions of Modena and Reggio costs $ 1 25 
to $ 1 80. 
Mass-produced bal­
samic vinegars cost 
much less. The best 
of these combine 
high-quality wine 
vinegar, cooked-down 
grape must, young bal­
samic vinegar, and cara­
mel for color and flavor­
ing. The worst are made 
from cheap wine vinegar, 
sugar, and caramel coloring. 
Lungarotti 
Balsamic 
Grape Sauce falls between 
artisan and mass produc­
tion. Compared to its pedi­
greed competition, Lun­
garotti is a steal at $45 for 
a 1 30ml bottle (just over 
Y2 cup) . It's a good choice 
for those who want to ex­
perience a high-quality balsamic vinegar 
at a lesser price. The respected wine­
producing Lungarotti family of Perugia, 
Italy, makes this balsamic in the same 
manner as the artisans of Modena and 
Reggio. (Lungarotti's vinegar can't be 
labeled "balsamic vinegar" because it 
isn't produced in these regions, hence the 
name "grape sauce.") 
Lungarotti tastes rich and complex. In 
my kitchen, I didn't blend or cook the 
vinegar; rather, I used it as is to showcase 
its delicate qualities. A few drops of the 
vinegar are a wonderful condiment for 
beef tenderloin or veal chops. A simple 
toss of Lungarotti with blanched and 
cooled vegetables creates delicious results. 
When I marinated strawberries for a 
half hour with a tablespoon of the Lun­
garotti, the berries became delightfully 
sticky, with a sweet and savory juiciness. 
I look forward to treating fresh cherries 
the same way. 
While I wouldn't use a $5 tablespoon 
of balsamic to make a vinaigrette, Lun­
garotti provides a flavor that mass­
produced balsamic vinegars can't touch. 
To find out where you can buy Lun­
garotti Balsamic Grape Sauce, contact 
the distributor, Mauro & P. Associates at 
2 12/629-341 1 . It's also available by mail 
from Dean & DeLuca (800/22 1-77 14). 
-lacklohnston, chef, Parigi, 
Dallas, Texas • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 11 ---
These Fiesta Pork Burritos are as delicious 
as they are easy. All it takes is some fresh, lean, 
boneless pork and a few other easy ingredients. 
You'll have dinner rolled up in no time. 
Preparation and cooking time: 15 minutes. 
Fiesta Pork Burritos 
Slice about a pound of boneless pork loin into strips and stir-fry with one 
teaspoon vegetable oil and sliced onion. Stir in an 11-ounce can of drained 
corn and toss with two teaspoons taco seasoning. Roll up portions in four 
warmed flour tortillas and serve with salsa, rice and beans. Serves four. 
Nutrient information, approximately, per serving: 418 cal.; 12 g. total fat; 3 g. saturated fat; 66 mg. cholesterol. 
For recipes, send a self-addressed, stamped, business-size envelope to: 
Recipes-Ad, Box 10383, Des Moines, IA 50306. 
Nutrient analysis done by The Food Processor II Diet Analysis Software. Pork data from USDA Handbook 8-10 (1991). 
The most 
delicious 
things 
happen 
wheDYou 
(utlnto 
pork. 
The Other 
WhiteMeatÎ 
America's Pork Producers. 
Ў 1994 National Pork Prooll{ers Courn:il in cooperatIon with the National Pork Board.

--- Page 12 ---
FOOD SCIENCE 
Controlling bacteria in food 
through temperature 
Danger 
zone 
• 
.. 
Bacteria thrive at room tempera­
ture. Some can double in num­
ber evef}' 15 minutes. 
Bacteria are a natural part of our world 
and we consume millions or billions 
every day without ill effects. For in­
stance, some cheeses contain billions of 
harmless bacteria, which give the 
cheese its flavor. But some bacteria can 
harm humans. There may be as many 
as 80 million cases of food-borne dis­
ease in the United States every year, 
though the majority of infected people 
have mild symptoms and don't seek 
medical attention. 
The bacteria that make you sick can­
not be detected in or on food, except by 
special laboratory tests. Bad-smelling 
food, full of bacteria that cause spoiling, 
may be quite harmless. Conversely, the 
best-looking and -smelling food may 
contain harmful bacteria. Some bacte­
ria, such as the E. coli strain that has 
recently made news, don't have to be 
able to grow (multiply) in the food, they 
just have to be there alive, and in very 
low numbers, to cause illness. Others, 
however, need to multiply to numbers 
sufficient to cause illness; lower numbers 
can be ingested without apparent ill 
effects. With some strains, the bacteria 
themselves are harmless, but the toxins 
they produce can make you sick. Most 
12 
foods can support the growth of some 
bacteria. Your best bet is to treat all 
foods, both raw and cooked-particu­
larly those of animal origin-as though 
they do harbor harmful bacteria. 
Use extremes of hot and cold-You 
can prevent bacteria from becoming a 
problem by controlling the temperature 
at which food is stored, cooked, and 
reheated. To deal effectively with those 
bacteria that must multiply in food to 
cause illness, keep food out of the 
"danger zone," the range of temperatures 
at which bacteria multiply-between 
41 ° and 140°F. Below 41°, most bacteria 
are still alive, but they're not multiply­
ing-or not multiplying very fast. When 
food is heated above 140°, most bacteria 
are killed and are therefore no longer a 
problem. Between 4 1 ° and 1 40°, most 
bacteria live quite comfortably and re­
produce vigorously. At typical summer 
temperatures, bacteria multiply very 
rapidly; some can double their popula­
tions every 10 or 15 minutes. 
If food has been cooked, cooled, and 
reheated, it has passed through the dan­
ger zone twice-once as it cooled and 
once as it warmed up again-so any bac­
teria that survived the initial cooking or 
Chilling food below 
41°F stops the 
growth of bacteria, 
but doesn't kill them. 
got in the food after it was cooked has 
had two chances to multiply and accu­
mulate. Also, not all toxins produced by 
bacteria can be destroyed by heat--Dne 
more good reason to prevent bacteria 
from multiplying in the first place. 
Quick chilling-To minimize time 
spent in this bacteria-friendly zone, chill 
food quickly. For nonliquid dishes, first 
quickly cool them to room temperature 
by spreading the food out in a thin layer 
on a plate or baking sheet, and then 
cover it and put it in the refrigerator. For 
stocks and soups, put the whole pot in an 
ice bath, and stir to quickly bring the 
temperature down before refrigerating. 
Killing bacteria with heat-While 
cold temperatures keep the bacteria 
from multiplying, high temperatures are 
needed to actually kill them. Bacteria 
succumb to heat for the same reasons 
that any living cell does. Heat does phys­
ical damage to the bacterial cell's pro­
tective membranes, but more impor­
tantly, heat denatures proteins (see Fine 
Cooking #2) . To carry out the functions 
of life, bacteria and other cells depend 
on proteins called enzymes. Enzymes are 
special proteins that catalyze chemical 
reactions. The sum of thousands of these 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 13 ---
When food is reheated, the 
dormant bacteria begin to 
multiply again. 
reactions, catalyzed by hundreds to 
thousands of enzymes, are what define 
the organism's life. When the reactions 
stop, the organism dies. Heat disrupts 
the special three-dimensional structure 
of the bacterial cell's enzymes and ren­
ders them inactive. If enough enzymes 
are destroyed, the bacterium dies. 
While most bacteria will die when 
they reach 140°, many can survive higher 
temperatures. Even bacteria of the same 
species (of which there are thousands) 
die at different rates. Bacteria are well 
adapted to survive. This is the reason 
that vigilance in cooking is stressed. 
Time is important, too-Vigilance 
means controlling not just temperature, 
but time, too. Most recipes specify one 
cooking temperature and one fixed 
time. The U.S. Food and Drug Admin­
istration's Food Code 1993 now specifies 
flexible time/temperature combina­
tions. (To get a copy, see the informa­
tion at the end of the article.) Some 
foods can't be cooked at temperatures 
high enough to kill bacteria and still re­
tain their sensory appeal. For example, 
the Food Code directs that ground meats 
should be cooked to heat all parts of 
the food to a temperature of 155° for 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
15 seconds. But to allow for flexibility 
in the kitchen, time/temperature com­
binations that are equivalent in their 
lethality for bacteria can also be used. 
The Food Code says that ground beef 
can be cooked to 150° for one minute, 
or to 145° for three minutes. For roast 
beef, equivalent lethality is delivered to 
bacteria when the roast is cooked so 
that all parts are heated to 1 45° for 
three minutes, or at the other time/tem­
perature extreme, 130° for 1 2 1 minutes. 
Again, these two time/temperature 
combinations are equal in their ability 
to kill bacteria. Rare roast beef can be 
safely prepared by cooking at the lower 
temperature, but for a longer time. The 
chef's best insurance for proper cooking 
is a well-calibrated oven and a reliable 
cooking thermometer. 
Microwave ovens cook differently 
than conventional ovens, and not every 
spot in the food may be equally heated 
by microwave cooking. That's why the 
Food Code specifies that the food must be 
rotated or stirred during cooking to com­
pensate for uneven heat distribution. 
Food that is to be cooked in a microwave 
should also be covered to retain surface 
moisture because bacteria on a dry sur-
FOOD SCIENCE 
Heating food above 140" kills 
most bacteria and destroys 
some of the toxins the bacte­
ria have produced. 
face are sometimes more resistant to 
heat; the food should be heated to tem­
peratures 25° above the recommended 
conventional oven temperatures. After 
cooking, it's extremely important to let 
microwaved food stand covered for two 
minutes to let the temperature even out. 
This assures delivery of an adequate 
time/temperature combination. 
The best and most current compilation 
of these time/temperature combinations 
and other food safety guidelines is the new 
Food Code, a guide for restaurants and re­
tail outlets. This 430-page document is 
available on hard copy, on computer 
diskette, and through a computer modem 
from National Technical Information Ser­
vice (NTIS) at 703/487 -4650. The more 
you know about food-borne illness, the 
less likely it will affect you. 
If you have questions about food-borne 
diseases, call the USDA's Meat and Poul­
try Hotline (800/535-4555), or the FDA's 
Seafood Hotline (800/FDA-40 1 0) . 
-Douglas Archer, PhD., is the chair of 
the Food Science and Human Nutrition De­
partment at the University of Florida in 
Gainesville. He previously served as the 
Deputy Director of the Center for Food Safe­
ty and Applied Nutrition at the FDA. • 
13

--- Page 14 ---
Only Bertolli, Italy's best-selling, 
best-loved olive oil, could bring out the true, 
subtle flavors of such delicious foods as this. 
Olive Oil has No Cholesterol. 
And Bertolli not only makes foods better, 
it's better for you, as olive oil is naturally 
cholesterol free. 
Of course foods like this are appreciated not 
only in Italy, where Bertolli has been made for 
over 125 years, but here, where families like 
yours have made it the best-loved olive oil in 
America today. 
Zuppo Fresco de/I'Orto 
1 cup diced pink skinned 
patatoes, unpeeled 
1/2 cup diagonally sliced celery 
1/2 cup diagonally sliced carrot 
2 garlic cloves. minced 
1/4 cup Bertolli Extra Virgin 
Olive Oil 
B cups chicken stock, fat 
skimmed from surface 
1/4 tsp. saffron 
1 cup diagonally cut French 
green beans (slender) 
1/2 cup baby lima beans, fresh 
or thawed frozen 
3 Tbsp. orzo (rice shaped pasta) 
1 cup coarsely chopped hearts 
of escarole 
1 cup zucchini and/or yellow 
squash, quartered lengthwise 
and cut diagonally 
1/2 cup diagonally sliced 
asparagus spears 
1/2 cup diagonally sliced 
scallions 
1/2 cup tiny peas, fresh or 
thawed frozen 
1/3 cup diced plum tomatoes, 
peeled and seeded, fresh 
or canned (optional) 
Salt, pepper and Parmesan 
cheese, to taste 
1. Combine potato, celery, carrot. garlic and olive oil in large 
broad saucepan. Cover; cook over low heat. stirring 
occasionally, until vegetables are tender. but not browned, 
about 10 min. 
2. Add broth and saffron. Heat to boiling. Stir in green beans, 
lima beans, orzo. Coak, stirring, until tender, about B min. 
Add escarole; simmer 5 min. 
3. Stir in zucchini and/or yellow squash, asparagus, scallions, 
green peas. Simmer just until tender and heated through, about 
5 min. Add tomatoes, ୅ using. Sa` and pepper, to taste. Ladle 
into bowls. SeNe sprinkled with slivers of Parmesan cheese. 
SeNes6-B. 
FREE RECIPE BOOK! 
To get your Bertolli Olive Oil Handbook containing 25 delicious recipes and money-saving 
coupons, send $1.25, check or money order, for postage and handling to: Bertolli Nutrition Center, 
P.O. Box 2399, Secaucus, NJ 07096-2399.

--- Page 15 ---
IF You WANT IrTo BE BEI'I 
Ir BEI'IER BE BERfOLLI.

--- Page 16 ---
lips 
To share your shortcuts or tricks 
with fellow readers, write to Tips, 
Fine Cooking, PO Box 5506, Newtown, 
CT 06470-5506. Enclose a sketch if 
you like. We pay $25 to $50 for tips 
we publish. 
Drying and Storing Lettuce 
Frustrated with drying each and every 
lettuce leaf with a paper towel, I came up 
with a method for drying lettuce that 
turned out to be a great way to store fresh 
salad greens and have them ready to 
serve on a moment's notice. Spread the 
wet greens out on a clean terry towel. 
Roll up the towel with the wet leaves 
tucked inside, as you would a jelly roll. 
Put the roll in the refrigerator on the low­
est shelf. The towel acts as a wick, first 
absorbing the water clinging to freshly 
washed leaves, and then gradually feed­
ing it back as the leaves need it. Later, 
when you unroll the towel, you'll have 
crisp, unblemished, bone-dry lettuce. 
Just take as much as you require, roll the 
towel up again, and put it back in the 
fridge. The greens will stay fresh, crisp, 
and dry for up to five days. 
-Lillian Kayte, Gainesville, FL 
Cooling Stock Quickly 
To quickly chill stock so that I can skim 
off the fat, I use my ice-cream maker. 
First I chill the container of the ice ­
cream maker in the freezer as I would for 
making ice cream. I pour some of the hot 
stock into the container, and after five 
minutes of occasional stirring, the fat has 
16 
congealed on the surface and is easy to 
remove. The freezer container is usually 
cold enough to handle another batch of 
stock, and a third pass may even work. 
Even if I can't quick-chill the whole 
batch of stock, at least I've lowered the 
temperature of a good portion of it so 
that the rest doesn't need as long a re­
frigeration before defatting it. 
-David Auerbach, Durham, NC 
Streakless Egg Wash 
To make an egg wash that is smooth, 
evenly textured, and brushes on easily, I 
add a pinch of salt to one whole egg beat­
en with one tablespoon of water. The salt 
breaks down the protein in the egg white 
so that the wash is fluid. This way I don't 
end up trying to brush out globs of vis­
cous egg white on tender bread dough. 
The baked bread has an even color with 
no streaks. 
-Robin Rice, Norwich, VT 
Washing Lots of 
Mushrooms 
To wash volumes of mushrooms quickly, 
plunge the mushrooms into a bath of two 
quarts water, Yz cup vinegar, and Y4 cup 
salt. Briefly swirl the mushrooms around 
to dislodge the dirt, and then lift the 
mushrooms out of the bath. The slightly 
acidic saline solution forces the dirt off 
quickly and the vinegar also helps keep 
the mushrooms from darkening. 
-Arthur Gordon, chef/owner, 
Irregardless Cafe, Raleigh, NC 
Securing a Pasta Machine 
To clamp down a pasta machine securely 
without risking damage to your counter-
top, clamp the machine to a cutting 
board. Put a piece of nonslip material­
the kind you put between a rug and a 
slippery floor-between the cutting 
board and the countertop. Your pasta 
machine won't budge when you crank it. 
The nonslip material is available at car­
pet and hardware stores for about a dol­
lar a square foot. 
-JJ Jackson, Victoria, BC 
Make Pesto Go Further 
I learned from my Italian mother-in-law 
to add potato to basil pesto to cut down 
on any bitterness in the basil, to give the 
pes to more smoothness and body, and 
simply to yield more pesto. For every two 
cups of packed, whole basil leaves, I add 
two small, boiled, peeled, and cooled 
potatoes (boiling potatoes are best) to 
the processor or blender. 
-Pat Melilli, Wappinger's Falls, NY 
Freezing Parsley 
If you love using fresh parsley but seem to 
wind up with most of it going bad in the 
fridge, try this method for freezing it. 
Wash and dry the parsley, remove the 
leaves, and put them in a food processor. 
Chop them on high speed for about 20 
seconds. Put the chopped parsley in the 
bottom of a plastic freezer bag, roll up the 
bag to remove all the air, and stick it in 
the freezer. It will keep for up to six 
months. You can use the parsley frozen, 
even in a dish that won't be cooked-the 
parsley will thaw in a matter of seconds. 
-Nina Rago, Tampa, FL 
Ball of Herbs 
When adding loose herbs to a sauce, 
stew, or soup, instead of messing with 
cheesecloth and string, I put the herbs or 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 17 ---
" 'Highest caliber' describes the 
graduates of Peter Kump's 
we've had at the restaurant." 
,..--------------,IT""-----, " ... Their knowledge of food and food 
chemistry is first rate and their technical 
skills are superior. The school solidly 
prepares a young cook for the exacting 
discipline of being a chef." 
We couldn't have said it better 
ourselves. 
At Peter Kump's New York Cooking 
School we're getting people ready for top 
level careers--and because we require two 
years of college for admission, we can do 
it in only 20 weeks. 
Our apprenticeship program boasts 
placement in the most prestigious estab­
lishments here and abroad. Our gradu­
ates take their pick of the thousands of 
new food industry jobs available each 
year and work in the most exclusive 
.... ..1...------------"------'----1 restaurants in the country. Or run their 
Charlie Trotter, Chef-Owner 
Charlie Trotter's, Chicago 
James Beard Award winner, America's Best Chef (Midwest) 
PETER KUMPS 
For the information about our career and 
!OIOOL
ŋOF "home cooking"courses, or to arrange for a visit, call 
8
00-5
22-4610. Other locations in Washington D.C, 
ART New Jersey, Westchester and Long Island, NY. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
own rewarding businesses. In as little as 
20 weeks. 
PETER 
KUMP'S 
NEW 
YORK 
COOKING 
SCH
OOL 
307EAST 92ST.NEW YORK, .Y10128 
America's finest foods, 
direct from Stanislaus 
County Farms 
Try a delectable sampling from our 
impressive collection of fresh and natural 
foods. Four one pound jars of pure 
natural honey, Sage, Orange Blossom, 
Buckwheat, and Alfalfa. Flavors from 
mild herbaceous to earthy robust. 
These are exquisite honeys 
and only $25.00 
plus S/I·1. 
09916 
To order plus our newsletter: 
1-800-933-2672 EXT. 2 
Post Office Box 5175 F 
Modesto, CA. 95352-5175 
• AMERICA'S FINEST • 
PRESERVES 
from Michigan's fruitlands 
EARLY GLOW STRAWBERRY PRESERVES 
RED HAVEN PEACH PRESERVES 
SOUR CHERRY SPOON FRUIT® 
WILD CHOKECHERRy-ApPLE JELLY 
"We capture and preserve 
what nature makes perfect" 
For a free catalogue with recipes: 
800,222,5886 
P.O. Box 566, Petoskey, MI 49770 
17

--- Page 18 ---
lips 
spices in a mesh tea ball and hook the 
chain over the edge of the pot. The ball is 
easily retrieved, and I don't have to strain 
the sauce. 
-Ruby Thomas, Anacortes, WA 
Loosening Molds 
Unmolding a frozen dessert or other 
chilled food that clings like glue to its 
container can be a frustrating mess. Dip­
ping the mold in hot water to melt the oil 
or butter and release the food doesn't al­
ways work, and after several tries you're 
mopping rivulets of water from the serv­
ing platter. 
I like to use this dry method instead. 
Run the point of a knife around the edge 
of the cold mold, and then invert the 
mold and center it on a serving platter. 
With a hair dryer set on high, blow hot 
air at all the surfaces of the mold, making 
several passes about six to eight inches 
from the mold. A few seconds of this and 
you lift the mold from a perfectly released, 
perfectly centered, completely unblem-
ished dessert on a dry, clean platter. 
-Martin Stone, author, Desserts with 
a Difference, New York, NY 
Cutting Cheesecake 
To cut attractive, smooth-edged slices of 
cheesecake, use fishing line instead of a 
knife. Cut a piece of fishing line (IS-pound 
monofilament) longer than the diameter 
of the cheesecake. Wrap the ends of the 
line around your middle fingers, stretch 
the line taught, and push it down through 
the center of the cake, slicing the cake in 
half (left drawing). Let go of the line with 
one hand, and with the other hand, pull 
the line out of the side of the cake, as close 
to the plate as possible ( drawing below) . 
You can wipe off any cheesecake sticking 
to the line with a paper towel. Continue 
to make cuts through the center of the 
cake until you've divided the cake into as 
many slices as you need. 
-John Paloian, J &J Cheesecake, 
Newtown, CT 
Editor's Note: If you don't have fishing 
line handy, Eric Mockler of Norwalk, CT, 
suggests using dental floss instead. • 
Accredited by CCA . 
. :. 
10 Students per class 
Complete 2 years in 1 
"hands-on" 50% of school time 
financial aid for those who qualify 
.:. 
100% job placement 
D iscover America's best 
beers delivered rightto 
your door. A gift or personal 
membership in Beer Across 
of two different American 
micro-breweries, along with a 
newsletter detailing each 
brewery's heritage and food 
(504) 343-6233 • (800) 927-0839 
Fax (504) 336-4880 
18 
America includes a 
monthly shipment 
of two six-packs, 
one from each 
recipes to compliment the 
^_'E1! beer. $14.95 per 
g mo"", p'""hl"I",. 
An ideal gift for any Occasion! 
427 Lafayette Street · Baton Rouge, LA 70802 
"KIWP' 
You on'f ave fo EO own un er 
to gef a fosfe of the outback. 
100% Natural Kiwi Jam. 
Fantastic on your favorite breakfast item, 
far a gourmet glaze on ham, pork, chicken; 
or you name it, even on your fingers far licking. 
1 1 fantastic Ravors: 
original, rhubarb, orange, strawberry, pineapple, 
red raspberry, baysenberry, blueberry, blackberry, 
and for you wine lovers! 
chardonnay or cabernet sauvignon 
12 oz. jar $6.99 or 3 for $19.99 includes 
free shipping & recipe 
TASTE FOR GOURMET GALLERY 
6289 W. SAMPLE RD., CORAL SPRINGS, FL 33067 
CALL (800)-TASTEYI (827-8391 ) 
VISA, Me., & DISCOVER 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 19 ---
Eagle® Brand Double Delicious Oookie Bars 
(Prep Time: 10 Minutes) 
COU11l on Eagle Brfllld Sweetened Condensed Milk for chunky, chewy cookie bars 
no one can resist. Created by the Borden Kitchens, Eagle Brand classic dessert recipes 
are always quick, easy and incredibly deliciolls. 
112 cup margarine or burter 
1 -1 12 cups graham cracker crumbs 
1 ( 14-oz. ) can Eagle® Brand Sweetened Condensed Milk 
(NOT evaporated milk) 
1 (12 oz. ) package semi-sweet chocolate chips 
1 cup peanut butter chips 
Preheat oven to 3500 (3250 for glass dish). In 1 3x9-inch baking 
pan, melt margarine in oven. Sprinkle crumbs evenly over 
margarine; pour Eagle® Brand evenly over crumbs. Top with 
chips; press down firmly. Bake 25 to 30 minures or until 
lightly browned. Cool. Cut into bars. Store loosely covered 
at room temperature. (Makes 24 to 36 bars . )

--- Page 20 ---
20 
The Vibrant Art of 
Thai Cooking 
Sparkling fresh flavors, textures, and colors 
make a Thai dinner shine 
BY ARUN SAM PANTHAVIVAT 
Bright, pungent in­
gredients unite in Hot 
and Sour Soup, yet 
they retain their dis­
tinctive flavors, colors, 
and shapes. Lemon­
grass, galangal (Thai 
ginger), kaffir lime 
leaves, cilantro, and 
pickled plum make the 
soup tart, lemony, and 
aromatic. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 21 ---
A t its heart, Thai food is about the interplay 
of distinct flavors, colors, and textures. 
Each dish is composed from a palate of fresh herbs, 
crunchy vegetables, pungent spices, subtle flavor­
ings, and tender meats and seafood. Like a gallery, 
the meal itself displays a beautiful variety of dishes. 
Artful presentation makes the first impression, then 
follows a balance of distinct and delicate flavors. 
The meal for six people that I present here demon­
strates the principles of balance and variety so 
important in Thai cooking. It includes a light, crisp 
salad, a tart soup, nourishing stir-fry noodles, grilled 
meat, and sauteed vegetables. 
WHY THAI FOOD IS SO POPULAR 
The rapid growth in popularity of Thai food in the 
United States doesn't surprise me. American diners 
are now looking beyond Chinese food and other 
familiar ethnic cuisines. America's growing taste for 
spiciness, shown by the popularity of Cajun and 
Mexican food, has helped prepare Americans for the 
bold flavors of Thai food. The growing emphasis on 
freshness makes Thai food all the more appealing 
because central to it are fresh herbs and vegetables. 
Finally, authentic Thai cookery is now possible in 
America because Thai ingredients are becoming 
more available (see Sources on p. 22) . The recent 
influx of Sou theast Asians into American cities has 
created markets for exotic herbs, vegetables, and 
condiments that you couldn't find before. As a for­
eign student studying in America ten years ago, I 
had to grow a potted kaffir lime tree in the window 
of my small apartment because the leaves, needed in 
many Thai dishes, were simply not available. Today 
the kaffir lime leaves I use in my restaurant are 
grown in Florida and California. 
DISTI NCTIVE THAI FLAVORS 
The vibrant character of Thai food comes from care­
fully balancing hot, sweet, sour, and bitter flavors 
both within a dish and within a meal. Thai cooks 
rarely use recipes; instead they taste and make ad­
justments as they go. 
Thai cooking glories in the use of fresh herbs. 
Fresh herbs have delicate overtones of flavor that 
are lost when the herbs are dried. With fresh herbs, 
the flavors not only permeate the dish, but also re­
main in the tissue of the leaf itself-you get a burst of 
flavor when you bite into the herb. Cilantro, also 
known in the u.s. as fresh coriander or Chinese 
parsley, is cooked in some dishes and used raw in 
salads and as a garnish. Its flavor is prominent in the 
Spicy Shrimp Salad, accompanied by fresh mint 
(recipe p. 23) . Fresh basil is also important in Thai 
cooking. While the Roasted Eggplant with Shrimp 
and Basil (recipe p. 24) tastes the most authentic 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
when made with Thai basil, which has an anise 
flavor, the more readily available sweet basil used in 
Italian cooking is a good substitute. 
Lemongrass and kaffir lime leaves both have an 
aromatic, lemony flavor that perfumes many Thai 
dishes. Lemongrass is a long, slender, multilayered, 
pale-green stalk usually as thick as a finger (see 
photo on p. 22) . Only the first couple of inches near 
the root end are juicy enough to use. If the outer 
layers look dry and brown, peel them off to reveal 
the green layers inside. Since lemongrass is fibrous 
and tough, you need to slice it extremely thin before 
adding it to dishes in which it will be eaten raw, like 
the Spicy Shrimp Salad. When you're going to steep 
it in liquids, like the broth for Hot and Sour Soup 
(recipe p. 24), you can cut it 
into thicker slices because it 
MENu 
isn't meant to be eaten. Kaffir 
lime leaves impart a pungent, 
lemon-lime flavor. Often 
packaged in plastic bags by 
the branch, kaffir lime leaves 
are sold both fresh and 
frozen. These tough leaves 
are sliced fine to toss in the 
Spicy Shrimp Salad or just 
torn to simmer in the Hot 
and Sour Soup. 
Spicy Shrimp Salad (Sang-Wa)* 
• 
Pork Satay with Peanut Dipping 
Sauce and Cucumber Salad 
(Moo Satay) * 
• 
Hot and Sour Soup 
(Tom Yum Kai) * 
• 
Two kinds of ginger are 
used in Thai cooking: com­
mon ginger (the ginger usu­
ally found in supermarkets), 
and a type that's harder to 
find, called galangal, Thai 
ginger, or laos (see photo on 
p. 22). Though cousins, ga­
langal and ginger have differ­
ent flavors and shouldn't be 
used interchangeably. Galan­
gal has a more aromatic, al­
most medicinal flavor and has 
Roasted Eggplant with Shrimp and 
Basil (Makhua Song Kruang) * 
• 
Bangkok-Style Glass Noodles 
(Phad Wunsen)* 
• 
Jasmine Rice (Khao Horm Mali) 
• 
Sliced Mangos (Mamuang) 
• recipe follows 
none of the bite of common ginger. I use thick slices 
of galangal in Hot and Sour Soup. 
Most Thai dishes incorporate fresh chiles. Thai 
chiles are red, small, and very hot. If you can't find 
them, serrano peppers are more commonly available 
in American supermarkets and are a good substi­
tute. If serranos aren't available, use the larger 
jalapeno chiles. Much of the hotness of chiles is in 
the seeds, so leave them in to produce hotter dishes, 
or remove the seeds to moderate the heat. 
Coconut is the backdrop of many Thai dishes, es­
pecially curries. In this meal, I use coconut milk in 
the marinade for the Pork Satay and in the Peanut 
Dipping Sauce (recipes pp. 23-24), where it is mixed 
with Massaman curry paste, one of the many pastes 
21

--- Page 22 ---
22 
used to flavor Thai dishes. Canned coconut milk is 
easy to find and fine to use for this dish because it's 
one ingredient among many, so absolute freshness of 
flavor is less important. 
Fish sauce and soy sauce supply a salty flavor. 
Made from fermented fish, fish sauce, or nam pIa, 
can take some getting used to. Use a high-quality 
Thai brand, such as Tipparos, because lower-quality 
fish sauces tend to be overly salty. Along with the 
regular type of soy sauce commonly found in the 
U.S., Thai cooking also uses a dark soy sauce, called 
see-ewe dum, and a dark, sweet soy sauce, called see­
ewe wan. (Dragonfly is a good brand for both types.) 
I like to use these darker soy sauces to enhance the 
color of a dish and to give it a slightly sweet over-
SOURCES FOR 
THAI INGREDIENTS 
Anzen Importers 
736 N.E. MLK Jr. Blvd., Portland, OR 97232 
503/233-51 1 1 
K. Kalustyan's 
1 23 Lexington Ave., New York, NY 1 001 6 
21 2/685-3451 
Oriental Food Market &: Cooking School 
2801 W. Howard St., Chicago, IL 60645 
31 2/274-2826 
The Oriental Pantry 
423 Great Rd. (2A), Acton, MA 01 720 
800/828-0368 
Spice Merchant 
PO Box 524, Jackson Hole, WY 83001 
800/551 -5999 
tone. You'll notice that the 
transparent noodles in the 
Bangkok-Style Glass Noodles 
(recipe p. 25) take on the 
color of the dark soy sauce. 
In Thailand, street vendors 
sell pickled plums, pickled 
mangoes, and other pickled 
fruits special to the region 
from their pushcarts. Though 
Thais don't use pickling as a 
means for preserving food as 
extensively as the Japanese or 
Koreans, we do like the sweet 
and sour dimension pickled 
fruits and vegetables add to a 
dish. Pickled plum gives the 
Hot and Sour Soup a little 
more tang, while cloves of 
pickled garlic are delightful to 
bite into in the Bangkok-Style 
Glass Noodles. 
Lime juice and tamarind 
juice also contribute a tart 
and sour flavor to many Thai 
dishes. Tamarind juice is 
made from the sticky pulp inside the pods from a 
tamarind tree. Sometimes you'll find these light­
brown, papery pods at Latin American or Asian 
markets, but more often you'll find dark-brown 
blocks of compressed tamarind pulp from the pods. 
To make tamarind juice from tamarind pods or 
blocks of tamarind pulp, dissolve the pulp in hot 
water and strain out the seeds to get a liquid the 
color and consistency of soy sauce. 
Many ingredients used in Thai cooking are be­
coming increasingly available in large supermarkets 
and specialty food stores in the United States, par­
ticularly in large urban areas. Asian markets are, of 
course, a good source for many Thai ingredients. 
There are mail-order sources for dried and canned 
ingredients (see Sources above) , but for the fresh 
The flavor of lemon­
grass is subtle, but 
the texture is tough. 
Thickly sliced lemon­
grass, above, is too 
tough to eat, but 
when steeped in the 
Hot and Sour Soup, it 
imparts a delicate 
lemon flavor. To make 
lemongrass easier to 
chew, cut the fibers 
short by slicing the 
stalk into thin rounds. 
Galangal looks 
similar to common 
ginger, but the taste 
is pure Thai. Its oro· 
matic, menthol flavor 
gives a distinctive char­
acter to Thai dishes. 
ingredients, you'll have to see what you can find 
locally. If you can't find an ingredient or a good sub­
stitute, prepare the dish without it and adjust the 
other flavorings to compensate. There are no rules 
in Thai cooking-taste and adjust the ingredients 
according to what's at hand and to suit your tastes. 
PUTTING TOGETHER A THAI M EAL 
Fresh, bright flavors, balance, variety, and pleasing 
presentation are the keys to a satisfying Thai meal. 
The dishes I've chosen for a six-person dinner have a 
good mix of flavors-hot, spicy, sour, bitter, sweet; 
and a lot of contrasting textures-crisp, soft, and 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 23 ---
Straight shrimp. 
For a nicer presenta­
tion, keep the shrimp 
from curling as it 
cooks by inserting a 
bamboo skewer 
through its length. 
chewy. The Pork Satay, with its accompanying curry­
flavored dipping sauce and cucumber salad, is the one 
dish that is predominantly meat. In the Spicy Shrimp 
Salad, the big, bright flavors of chile peppers, fresh 
mint, and cilantro balance the mild shrimp, which 
are doused with a sour marinade. The tart, aromatic 
broth in the Hot and Sour Soup makes your mouth 
tingle, while the Bangkok-Style Glass Noodles have a 
milder, more soothing flavor. Finally, the Roasted Egg­
plant with Shrimp and Basil has a tender, saucy, 
smoky quality not found in the other dishes. 
Serve all the dishes at the same time, presented 
family-style in platters and bowls. Have the diners 
serve themselves small tastes from each dish 
throughout the meal, rather than larger portions at 
the beginning. Serve plenty of rice with the meal­
my favorite is fragrant Jasmine rice, which you can 
also find in Asian groceries. Forks and spoons are 
the preferred eating utensils in Thailand. 
Though not really served as a separate course, 
desserts are also eaten at the end of a meal in 
Thailand. I like to serve fresh fruit, such as mango, 
nicely sliced and arranged. Thai custards and 
dessert soups, lightly sweet and delicate in flavor, 
are also wonderful. 
SPICY SHRIMP SALAD 
The sweet shrimp balances brightly flavored herbs and veg­
etables and hot chile peppers. The dish comes together 
quickly once the vegetables are chopped. Serves six. 
3 Tbs. lime juice 
2 Tbs. fish sauce 
Salt 
Sugar 
12 raw jumbo or colossal shrimp, in their shells, heads off 
2 Tbs. thinly sliced lemongrass 
2 Tbs. peeled and finely julienned ginger (common) 
3 to 4 chile peppers (Thai, serrano, or jalapeno), seeded and 
cut in fine julienne 
2 scallions (white parts and some green), in julienne 
l-2 cup loosely packed cilantro leaves 
l4 cup finely julienned red bell pepper 
l4 cup coarsely chopped fresh mint leaves 
4 shallots or 1 medium onion, sliced thin 
4 kaffir lime leaves, in extremely fine julienne 
Paprika (optional) 
1 Tbs. chopped chives 
12 bamboo skewers 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Heat a small pot of water in which to poach the shrimp. 
In a large bowl, combine the lime juice and fish sauce 
and add a pinch of salt and sugar. Set this dressing aside. 
To keep the shrimp from curling during cooking, pierce 
each one lengthwise from tail to head with a bamboo 
skewer (see photo above left). Poach the shrimp in barely 
simmering water until the shrimp is just cooked through 
and opaque, about 3 min. Remove the skewers and peel 
the shells off the shrimp, leaving the last segment of the 
shell near the tail and the tail itself intact. Slice the back of 
each shrimp and remove the dark intestinal tract by scrap­
ing it out with the tip of a knife. Place the shrimp in the 
dressing and toss to coat. 
Add to the shrimp the lemongrass, ginger, chile pep­
pers, scallions, cilantro, red pepper, mint, shallots, kaffir 
lime leaves, and, if you like, a dash of paprika. Toss well to 
combine the ingredients and garnish with the chives. 
PORK SATAY WITH PEANUT DIPPING SAUCE 
AND CUCUMBER SALAD 
Except for the final grilling of the marinated meat, this dish 
can be prepared in advance. Serve the skewers of meat on 
a plate with the peanut dipping sauce and cucumber salad 
in separate bowls on the side. Serves six. 
PORK SATAY: 
1 pork tenderloin, about 1 l-2 lb. 
l-2 tsp. ground coriander 
l-2 tsp. ground cumin 
1 Tbs. melted butter 
1 Tbs. unsweetened coconut milk (canned is fine) 
1 Tbs. vegetable oil 
1 tsp. paprika 
1 tsp. ground turmeric 
l-2 tsp. curry powder 
1 l-2 Tbs. fish sauce 
1 tsp. sugar 
12 bamboo skewers, 6 in. long 
Cut the tenderloin in half so that you have two pieces 
about 5 in long. Trim off the fat and square the edges. Slice 
Strong-flavored herbs 
and vegetables strike 
a balance with mild 
shrimp. Cilantro, 
mint, and kaffir lime 
leaves mix with slivers 
of lemongrass, ginger, 
scallions, and chile 
pepper to form a 
Spicy Shrimp Salad 
(recipe at left). 
23

--- Page 24 ---
Tender pork satay to 
dip in peanut sauce. 
Lean pork tenderloin 
is sliced and marinated 
in curry spices and 
then grilled until 
golden brown (recipe 
begins on p. 23). 
Cool, sweet-and-sour 
cucumber salad is a 
nice foil. 
To slice pork tender­
lain evenly, apply light 
pressure on top of the 
meat, and be sure to 
keep the knife hori­
zontal to the cutting 
board. Chilling the 
meat first will make it 
even easier to slice. 
24 
the meat lengthwise into %-in.-thick strips (see photo 
above). The pork will be easier to slice if you first chill it in 
the freezer for about an hour. 
Prepare the marinade by thoroughly blending all the 
ingredients except the pork in a large bowl. Add the pork, 
toss until well coated, and marinate in the refrigerator for 
30 to 60 min. Meanwhile, soak the skewers in cold water so 
they don't burn when you grill the meat. 
Insert a skewer lengthwise through the middle of each 
piece of meat. Cook the skewered pork either on a grill, un­
der the broiler, or in a frying pan over high heat until the out­
side is lightly charred but the inside is still tender and moist. 
PEANUT DIPPING SAUCE: 
Massaman curry paste gives the peanut dipping sauce a 
wonderful curry flavor. My favorite brand is Mae Sui, though 
other good brands are available at Asian markets. If Massa-
man curry paste isn't available, you can use a red curry paste 
instead, but don't substitute a curry powder. I like to use 
smooth Jif peanut butter in this sauce. Makes 7 Y.t cups. 
1 Tbs. Massaman curry paste 
l.2 cup smooth peanut butter 
1 l.2 cups unsweetened coconut milk 
1 Tbs. sugar 
In a small saucepan, mix together all the ingredients. Sim­
mer over low heat for 20 to 30 min. until the flavors are 
well blended. Serve warm or at room temperature. This 
sauce will keep for several weeks in the refrigerator. 
CUCUMBER SALAD: 
v., cup sugar 
1 tsp. salt 
l.2 cup rice vinegar 
4 pickling cucumbers (or 2 regular cucumbers), quartered 
lengthwise, seeded, and sliced thin 
1 shallot, sliced thin 
A few whole cilantro leaves 
A few strips of finely julienned red bell pepper (l.2 in. long) 
In a small saucepan, simmer the sugar and salt in the rice 
vinegar until dissolved, about 5 min. Let the mixture cool 
to room temperature and stir in the cucumbers and shallot. 
Sprinkle cilantro leaves and red pepper on top to decorate. 
HOT AND SOUR SOUP 
This soup is full of contrasting flavors and colors (see photo 
on p. 20). Look for pickled plum, lemongrass, galangal, 
kaffir lime leaves, and tamarind in Asian markets. If you 
can't get some of the ingredients, make the soup without 
them. Serves six. 
3 skinless, boneless chicken breast halves 
6 cups chicken stock (homemade or canned low-salt) 
2 to 3 chile peppers (Thai, serrano, or jalapeno) 
2 shallots 
1 in. galangal, peeled and cut into lis-in. slices 
1 stalk lemongrass, sliced thick 
2 tsp. tamarind pulp dissolved in 1 Tbs. hot water 
Y.t cup canned straw mushrooms, halved; or sliced fresh 
mushrooms 
2 pieces pickled plum 
3 to 4 kaffir lime leaves, torn halfway through 
2 cherry tomatoes, quartered 
1 cup loosely packed cilantro leaves 
2 tsp. minced scallion (white only) 
2 Tbs. freshly squeezed lime juice 
2 to 4 Tbs. fish sauce 
To help the chicken pieces hold their shape in the soup, first 
sear the whole breasts on both sides in a nonstick frying pan 
over medium-high heat. Cut the chicken into l oin. cubes. 
Bring the chicken stock to a boil in a saucepan over 
medium heat. Crush the chiles and shallots just enough to 
release their oils by pressing them against a cutting board 
with the flat part of a chefs knife. Add them to the stock, 
along with the galangal, lemongrass, tamarind juice, mush­
rooms, pickled plum, kaffir lime leaves, cherry tomatoes, 
and chicken. Bring the stock to a boil and let it simmer until 
all the ingredients are heated thoroughly and the chicken 
is cooked (about 4 min.). 
Right before serving, if you like, remove the tough 
lemongrass, galangal, kaffir lime leaves, and chile peppers. 
Add the cilantro, scallion, and lime juice. Season to taste 
with the fish sauce. 
ROASTED EGGPLANT WITH SHRIMP AND BASIL 
The smoky, roasted flavor of the eggplant is a nice foil to 
the basil in this dish. Long, slender Thai or Japanese egg-
FINE COOKING

--- Page 25 ---
plant work best because they cook quickly, have fewer 
seeds, and taste less bitter than the more common plump 
eggplant. Serves six. 
6 Thai or Japanese eggplant, 6 to 8 in. long 
11 cup vegetable oil 
1 Tbs. minced garlic 
4 shallots, sliced thin 
é cup chopped cilantro 
9 small raw shrimp, peeled, deveined, and halved 
é cup water 
1 tsp. brown fermented bean sauce or miso 
2 Tbs. soy sauce or fish sauce 
3 to 4 chile peppers (Thai, serrano, or jalapeno), seeded and 
cut in fine julienne 
1 small red bell pepper, julienned 
1 Tbs. sugar 
2 cups loosely packed basil leaves (Thai or sweet) 
Char the skins of each whole eggplant under a broiler, on a 
grill, or in a frying pan, turning the eggplant as each side 
blackens. When cool enough to handle, pull the skin off. 
Slice each eggplant lengthwise halfway through. Spread 
open the sides of each egglant to form a container and 
arrange them on a serving plate. 
Heat the oil in a wok or large, heavy frying pan over 
medium heat. Add the garlic and stir until it just begins to 
color. Stir in the shallots and 1 Tbs. cilantro. Add the shrimp 
and water and stir well. Stir in the fermented bean sauce, 
soy sauce, chile peppers, red pepper, sugar, and basil. Low­
er the heat and simmer briefly, until the the shrimp is 
cooked, about 2 min. Pour the shrimp and sauce over the 
eggplant. Garnish with the rest of the cilantro. 
BANGKOK-STYLE GLASS NOODLES 
The dried glass noodles called for in this recipe are thin, brit­
tle, milky-white noodles made from mung bean starch. 
They're usually sold in small bundles. The lily buds, cloud ear 
mushrooms, and pickled garliC add an authentic note to this 
popular Bangkok dish, but by all means make this stir-fry 
even if you can't find these ingredients. Serves six. 
6 oz. dried glass noodles (also called cellophane noodles, 
mung bean thread noodles, or Chinese vermicelli) 
é cup dried lily buds (also called golden needles) 
é Tbs. dried cloud ear mushrooms 
é cup vegetable oil 
1 Tbs. minced garlic 
1 cup thinly sliced raw chicken breast (about 11 Ib.) 
Salt 
3 eggs 
é cup julienned celery, cut 2-in. long 
1 cup finely shredded green cabbage 
é cup finely julienned carrots, cut 2-in. long 
1 Tbs. dark soy sauce (see-ewe dum), or sweet soy sauce 
(see-ewe wan) 
3 heads sweet pickled garlic or 3 heads roasted garlic, sliced 
thick horizontally 
14 cup soy sauce 
1 tsp. white pepper 
2 tsp. sugar 
2 cups chicken stock (homemade or canned low-salt) 
14 cup thinly sliced scallion (white and green parts), sliced on 
an angle 
Cilantro sprigs for garnish 
A few strips of julienned red bell pepper for garnish 
Soak the dried glass noodles and lily buds separately in 
warm water, and the cloud ear mushrooms in hot water, 
for 30 min. Drain well. 
Heat the oil over high heat in a wok or large, heavy fry­
ing pan. Add the garliC and stir until it begins to color, then 
stir in the chicken and a dash of salt. After a minute, push 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
the chicken to the sides of the wok and crack the eggs into 
the center of the pan. Scramble the eggs briefly, and then 
spoon the runny eggs onto the sides of the pan so that 
they cook thinly and quickly. Once the eggs have set, 
scrape them down and add the soaked noodles (cut them 
in half if they're very long), lily buds, cloud ears, celery, 
cabbage, carrots, dark soy sauce, pickled garlic, soy sauce, 
white pepper, and sugar, stirring well after each addition. 
Stir in the chicken stock and mix well. The stock should 
be absorbed fairly quickly, within 2 to 3 min. Continue 
cooking and stirring until the noodles are clear and glossy. 
Remove from heat and stir in the sliced scallion. Place 
on a serving plate and garnish with cilantro sprigs and 
red pepper. 
Arun Sampanthavivat, originally from the southern 
peninsula of Thailand, paints and writes poetry when 
he's not busy running his Chicago restaurant, 
'f\run's." • 
Carrots and squash 
become roses in 
hands skilled in the 
Thai art of vegetable 
carving. Because "food 
meets the eye before it 
meets the mouth, " 
Roasted Eggplant with 
Shrimp and Basil is 
even more appealing 
when presented with 
these decorations. 
Bangkok's favorite 
noodles. After a half· 
hour soak in water, 
dried glass noodles, lily 
buds, and cloud ear 
mushrooms are quickly 
stir-fried with chicken, 
eggs, slivered vegeta· 
bles and pickled garlic 
to make Bangkok·Style 
Glass Noodles (recipe 
at left).

--- Page 26 ---
Creating Perfect 
Pizza Crust 
Thin or thick, crisp or chewy-it's all 
in how you treat the dough 
BY GAY CHANlER 
26 
BASIC PIZZA DOUGH 
Yields about 3 pounds of dough. 
1 tablespoon dry yeast 
é teaspoon sugar 
2-?3 cups warm water 
2 tablespoons olive oil 
7é cups unbleached all-purpose flour 
y" cup whole-wheat or rye flour 
1 tablespoon coarse salt or 2 teaspoons fine salt 
E veryone knows that the perfect crust is the 
basis for the perfect pizza. I began my search 
for the perfect pizza crust ten years ago as a sideline 
to my daily bread-baking. While I had achieved a 
certain degree of expertise with bread, my pizzas in 
those days were unpredictable at best. After some 
research and a lot of experimentation with doughs, 
pans, ovens, toppings, and techniques, first in my 
home and later in professional kitchens, I learned 
what conditions and methods will conspire to create 
a perfect crust each time. 
Ultimately, a good pizza results from the balanced 
union of a well-cooked crust and appropriately se­
lected toppings. The crust can be thin and crisp, 
risen and light, or thick and chewy, depending on 
how the dough is handled (for a lineup of the three 
types, see the photo above) . The toppings can range 
from a simple combination of coarse salt, fresh 
herbs, and olive oil, to a spicily sauced, sausage­
studded, cheese-and-vegetable melange. Whatever 
style I choose to make, I want to be sure that the 
crust has good flavor and is fully cooked to a light 
crispiness-not doughy in the middle or wet and 
pasty under the topping. 
MAKING THE DOUGH 
I start with a basic dough recipe and then control 
the variables of rising, resting, and baking to get the 
crust I want. The recipe at left makes enough dough 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 27 ---
Three crust styles, same dough. Thin and crisp crust 
(left) is made from dough that has been refrigerated for 
at least several hours. Freshly made dough is best for a 
light, risen crust (center). For a thick, chewy crust 
(right), use either freshly made or chilled dough. The 
main difference between the center and right crusts is 
the amount of rising time just prior to baking the pizza. 
for three or four small pizzas or two large pizzas. 
I've achieved the best results when using an all­
purpose unbleached flour. Most such flours have a 
protein content of 1 1 to 12 percent, which is indi­
cated on the bag's nutritional information panel. 
This is also the gluten-factor indicator, which deter­
mines the elastic qualities of the dough. Higher­
gluten flours are better for breads and pasta, lower­
gluten flours for cakes and pastry. Cheaper flours 
usually contain less protein and therefore are less 
suitable for breads. 
The addition of whole-wheat or rye flour is 
optional, but I usually add one or the other for more 
flavor and nutrition. You can use as much as 1 cup 
of whole-wheat flour, but adding more than Y3 cup 
of rye flour per recipe will yield a dense, heavy 
dough, due to the lack of gluten in rye. I have made 
pizza dough using just bread flour with good results, 
though the higher gluten content of bread flours 
can make the dough stubbornly elastic when trying 
to ·make a thin crust. Using all bread flour is fine if 
I'm going to store the dough overnight in the re­
frigerator (chilling overnight gives the gluten a 
chance to relax) . Bumping up the yeast by an extra 
2 teaspoons gives an all-bread-flour pizza dough 
better rising action. 
Whatever flours I choose, I mix the dough care­
fully to avoid adding too much flour. Because the 
moisture content of flours may vary, slightly more or 
less flour than called for in the recipe may be need­
ed to achieve the correct light and springy consis­
tency. Too much flour, either added initially or 
kneaded in later, can make a heavy dough, and the 
crust will be dense or tough. Too little flour will 
make a sticky dough that's liable to tear during 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
shaping. The ideal dough is soft, springy, and pli­
ant, but not rubbery. 
I usually make my dough plain, preferring to add 
the spices and cheese in the topping. Occasionally I 
add to the dough sauteed chopped onions or herbs, 
such as oregano, thyme, rosemary, marjoram, or 
crushed red or black pepper. I know some cooks add 
grated cheese to the crust, but I'm wary of the cheese 
burning in the high temperatures at 
which I bake my pizzas. 
First I proof the yeast for 5 to 10 min­
utes in 1 cup of warm water and a pinch 
of sugar, until the yeast dissolves and the 
liquid begins to appear creamy. This tells 
me that the yeast is active. Red Star is 
the brand of yeast I prefer, simply be­
cause I've used it for years and I'm famil­
iar with the way it acts. I don't use fast­
rising yeast for pizza dough. It works so 
quickly that it can get away from me, 
and it isn't suitable for dough that I'm 
going to store in the refrigerator. (Chill­
ing doesn't stop the action of the yeast, 
but merely slows it down.) 
Next I add the remaining water and 
1 V2 to 2 cups flour, including the whole­
wheat or rye flour. I beat this well (a hun­
dred strokes) until it's smooth and soupy, 
and then let it stand for 10 to 15 minutes, 
until it's bubbly and swollen. I then add 
the salt and olive oil and proceed to stir in 
the rest of the flour by the cupful until I 
get a stiff but still slightly sticky dough. I always stir 
'the dough in the same direction so that the gluten 
strands retain a smooth, consistent pattern (this isn't 
readily discernible) . 
When the dough begins to form a cohesive mass 
that's thick enough to hold its shape, I tum it out 
onto a lightly floured surface and let it rest while I 
clean and oil the bowl. I knead the dough, turning 
it clockwise by quarter turns and sprinkling a little 
flour on top and on the surface underneath before 
folding it over. I add just enough flour so the dough 
doesn't stick and tear. (A dough scraper is invalu­
able for lifting the mass of dough cleanly from the 
counter.) Kneading takes about 5 to 8 minutes. 
When the dough is smooth, springy, and pliant­
earlobe-soft-I return it to the oiled bowl, cover it 
with a damp cloth, and let it rise until doubled. 
This generally takes between 35 and 45 minutes at 
70° to 75°F. 
CRUST OPTIONS 
I have three options for handling the dough after 
the first rise. I can form the crust, assemble the pizza 
and bake it immediately. I can punch the dough 
down and let it rise again before baking. This 
Shaping a pizza crust 
by hand. To start 
shaping a pizza, Gay 
Chanler takes a ball 
of dough and holds 
it vertically, turning 
it like a wheel and 
letting gravity stretch 
the dough. The dough 
shown here is just 
about ready to go on 
an oiled baking sheet, 
where Chanler will 
continue to work it 
into the desired shape, 
27

--- Page 28 ---
For a thin crust, use 
cold dough and work 
fast. The author rolls 
or presses the dough 
to about a quarter 
inch thick, dresses it 
lightly with oil and 
seasonings, and gets it 
into the oven before it 
starts to rise. Halfway 
through baking, she 
adds asparagus, pro­
sciutto, and fontina 
cheese (see the recipe 
at right). 
28 
doesn't substantially change the resulting crust, but 
it gives me more time if I need it before baking the 
pizza. Or, I can refrigerate the dough for several 
hours or up to two days. In this case, I give it a final 
punch down after it has chilled for about 40 min­
utes and put it in a plastic bag. 
By letting the dough mature in the refrigerator, 
the gluten ripens and relaxes. The dough becomes 
less sticky, and it will stretch farther when I work 
with it. With this refrigerated dough, I can obtain a 
thin, crisp crust, or a thick, chewy crust, depending 
on how thin I roll or stretch the dough when form­
ing it, and on whether or not I allow it to warm up 
and rise before baking it. A thick crust made from 
chilled dough is likely to have larger air bubbles and 
be less delicate and more chewy-rather like the 
difference between regular and sourdough breads. I 
believe crust made from refrigerated dough has a 
better flavor, too. 
For a light, risen crust, I like to use a freshly 
made dough, although you can use a chilled dough. 
For the highest, puffiest results, I add 2 teaspoons 
more yeast to the recipe and use the dough within 
three hours of making it. For a finer-textured crust, 
I simply roll it out thinner and let it rise to the same 
height. I let the dough rise until it's puffy, and my 
fingertips disappear when I press on it (as shown in 
the photo above right). This takes about 10 minutes 
with freshly made, room-temperature dough, or 
about 15 minutes with chilled dough. 
A thick, chewy crust can be made either with 
fresh or chiUed dough. I stretch or press the dough to 
about Y, to Vz inch thick and let it rise just slightly. 
Whether I end up with a thick and chewy crust or a 
light and risen one depends on how thick I roll it out 
and how high I let it rise. 
For a thin, crisp crust, I use dough straight out 
of the refrigerator. I roll it out as thin as I want it-
For a light, risen crust, fresh dough is best. Pressed or patted 
out to the desired shape, freshly made dough is allowed to rise 
until puffy and soft. When cooked, the interior will be light and 
slightly chewy, with fairly large air holes. 
usually about V4 inch-and get it into the oven 
within minutes, before it has a chance to rise. 
ASSEMBLING THE PIZZA 
I assemble the pizza on an oiled, rimless cookie 
sheet. A third of the dough recipe will make a 12- to 
16-inch round crust, depending on how thin I roll or 
spread it. The smaUer the circumference of the pizza, 
the easier it is to work with. 
As much as I'd love to, I've never mastered the 
flashy toss-and-spin technique of professional pizza 
makers. Instead, I lightly form the dough into a baU, 
and then stretch it out. First, I hold it vertically by one 
edge and turn it in my hands, allowing gravity to 
stretch it as I turn it (see the photo on p. 27). Then I 
lay it on the cookie sheet and press out the dough, 
starting from the center. I'm careful not to tear or poke 
holes in the dough. A floured rolling pin is handy for 
rolling out thin crusts. If the dough springs back, I let 
it rest a minute or two, or chill it in the fudge, and then 
continue to work it out. IfI'm using a sauce, I spread it 
on sparingly so that the dough shows through. Other­
wise the crust will be soggy on top. If I'm not using a 
sauce, I'll drizzle some olive oil over the dough and 
season it with salt, pepper; herbs, and perhaps garlic. 
Next, I arrange the toppings, usually three to four 
items, so that they don't overlap. I apply the cheese a 
little more than halfway through the baking process. 
By adding the cheese when the crust is just lightly 
browned, I can tell when the topping is sufficiently 
cooked and also avoid overbrowned, leathery cheese 
and an undercooked crust. Those toppings that don't 
need much cooking, like blanched spinach or 
asparagus, paper-thin prosciutto, or steamed shell­
fish, also go on at halftime, along with the cheese. 
I bake pizza in a very hot oven-475°F. I've 
baked pizzas on heavy baking sheets and on a bak­
ing stone. If it's sufficiently preheated, the stone 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 29 ---
yields a superior, dry, uniformly crisp crust. With­
out a stone, I can still get an excellent crust with an 
oiled sheet. I sometimes use both if my pizza is large 
and heavy, partially cooking the pizza on the baking 
sheet first, and then transferring it to the stone 
halfway through, when I add the cheese (a thin, raw 
dough can buckle when sliding onto a stone). This 
way, I can maintain an even, thin crust while get­
ting the benefits of the baking stone. 
I check the pizza during baking and rotate it if it 
appears to be cooking unevenly. Also, I lift the crust 
to see how it's cooking underneath (see the photo 
below) . If the bottom is still pale while the top seems 
almost done, I'll turn the oven temperature down 
and leave the pizza in longer. 
When the crust is lightly browned and the top­
pings are cooked, I sprinkle on the cheeses. Then I 
bake the pizza an additional 8 to 10 minutes, or until 
the cheese is melted and bubbly. By this time, the 
crust will be perfectly done. 
If I'm using a pizza stone, I slide the pizza onto a 
cookie sheet, or remove it with spatulas to a cutting 
board. I cut it into wedges with a long, sharp chef's 
knife or a pizza cutter. To keep it hot, I may serve only 
part of it at once, leaving the remainder on the stone 
in the turned-off oven. I rarely have any leftover 
pizza, but if I do, I thoroughly enjoy the remainder for 
lunch or a snack the following day, either at room 
temperature or reheated in a 3000 oven just until 
warm. The crust will no longer be crisp unless it's re­
heated, but it remains as tasty as ever. 
Gay Chanler studied at the New York Restaurant 
School and the Cordon Bleu in Paris. For six years, 
she was chef at Yaddo, an artist's retreat in Saratoga 
Springs, New York. Chanler currently works as a 
baker and pastry chef at Sweet Surrender, a com­
mercial custom bakery in Washington, DC. • 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Don't forget about 
the bottom of the 
crust. The perfect crust 
is thoroughly baked 
and nicely browned 
not only on the top, 
but also on the bot­
tom. The author 
checks the underside 
of the crust halfway 
through baking and 
at the end. 
Pizza toppings 
I usually use raw vegetables on my pizza, but left­
over cooked vegetables work well, too. Sliced thin 
and spread sparingly, raw onions, bell peppers, 
scallions, garlic, sliced fresh tomatoes, eggplant, 
or mushrooms will cook nicely. Drizzling a litde 
olive oil over raw vegetables enhances their tex­
ture and taste. Leftover ratatouille, cooked 
asparagus, broccoli, zucchini, and mushrooms 
also work well as long as they're not overcooked 
initially and are fairly dry when they go on the 
pizza. I always leave space between the items I put 
on a pizza. This prevents their juices from seeping 
into the crust and making it soggy on top. 
I use only cooked meats, such as ham, chick­
en, sausage, or beef, either leftovers or precooked. 
Shrimp, scallops, and mussels can be used raw as 
long as they aren't buried in the topping sauce, or 
they can be precooked. Below are some specific 
topping recipes from my kitchen.
-G
.C. 
SHRIMp, MUSSELS, AND HOT PEPPER 
This combination is especially good on a risen crust. 
Peel and devein 6 shrimp, and cut them in half length­
wise. Season them with lemon juice, salt, and pepper. 
Clean 8 mussels and steam them briefly, just long 
enough so they open, about 1 min. Shell them. Spread 
V2 cup seasoned tomato sauce thin over the crust and 
sprinkle with 2 or 3 slivered cloves of garlic and V2 tsp. 
oregano. Bake at 475°F, 1 2 to 1 5 min., until the crust 
begins to color. Remove the pizza from the oven. 
Arrange the shrimp and mussels evenly over the crust 
and sprinkle with V2 chopped jalapeno pepper, V2 cup 
shredded Monterey Jack or mozzarella and 2 Tbs. grat­
ed Parmesan. Bake for 8 to 1 0 min. more, until the 
cheeses are melted and bubbly. Garnish with cilantro. 
SPINACH, MUSHROOMS, AND BLUE CHEESE 
Try this on a thick and chewy crust. Brush the prepared 
dough lightly with olive oil and sprinkle with 6 slivered 
cloves of garlic, salt, and pepper. Bake at 4750 for 1 0 
min. Meanwhile, put 1 0 oz. spinach, washed and 
stemmed, in a colander in the sink and pour about a 
quart of boiling water over it. Let drain. Press gently to 
remove any excess moisture, but don't squeeze the 
spinach. Remove the crust from the oven, arrange the 
spinach, thin slices of red onion and mushrooms, and 
2 Tbs. pine nuts or walnut pieces on it. Bake 8 min. 
Sprinkle on 1 cup grated mozzarella and V2 cup crum­
bled blue cheese and bake another 5 min., until the 
cheeses are melted. 
ASPARAGUS, PROSCIUTTO, AND FONTINA 
This is great on a thin, criSp crust. Brush the prepared 
dough lightly with olive oil. Sprinkle with 4 sliced scal­
lions, V2 tsp. dill, salt, and pepper. Bake at 4750 for 1 0 
min., until the crust is firm and just beginning to color. 
Remove from the oven, arrange 8 to 1 0 spears of 
blanched, cooled, and drained asparagus, pieces of cut 
or torn prosciutto (about 2 oz.), and slices of fontina 
cheese (about 5 oz.). Sprinkle with Parmesan. Bake 8 to 
1 0 min. more, or until the cheeses are melted and bub­
bly and the crust is golden. 
29

--- Page 30 ---
For a garnish, choose 
ingredients that ac­
cent the rest of the 
saute_ The author cuts 
sour pickles into fine 
julienne to use in his 
cod saute; French cor­
nichons have the best 
flavor and texture. 
The pickles and some 
capers are a good 
sharp foil for both the 
mild cod and the rich 
butter in the sauce. 
30 
A Fresh Look at Sautes 
A French chef puts his contemporary spin 
on classic methods 
BY JEAN-CHARLES BERRUET 
S autes can be very simple. You brown the main 
ingredient in fat, garnish with vegetables, and 
make the sauce in the same pan, using all that tasty 
residue in the bottom. Sautes play a major role in 
classic French cuisine, and some dishes have be­
come elaborate affairs over the years. Take chicken 
Marengo, for example. It starts out with sauteed 
chicken, to which you add tomatoes, mushrooms, 
crayfish, and fried heart-shaped croutons; then you 
top the whole thing off with deep-fried eggs. 
But I prefer to cook simpler and lighter dishes, 
which I call sautes a la minute-instant sautes. I of­
ten use olive oil as the cooking fat for these sautes 
and take care to get the freshest ingredients; then 
I cook them so quickly that they keep their indi­
vidual flavors. 
My contemporary style of saute is very fast and 
easy to make. Once my ingredients are prepared, 
the dish doesn't take more than a few minutes to 
cook and assemble. While the possible combina­
tions of ingredients and seasonings are infinite, the 
basic method for a quick saute is the same. I'm from 
Brittany in France, so I'm a fish-lover by birth. In my 
adopted home of Nantucket, Massachusetts, excel­
lent fish are plentiful, so I often feature fish sautes 
on the menu of my restaurant. 
Whatever ingredient you choose-chicken, 
pork, rabbit, fish-make sure you pick a cut that's 
suitable for quick cooking. For example, if veal is 
your choice, don't use ossa buco (veal shanks), which 
are tough unless they're long-simmered. Choose 
something like veal scallop, which is tender with just 
minimal cooking. 
Cut the main ingredient into even pieces so 
they'll all cook at the same rate. And think about 
how the shape of your ingredient will translate into 
a finished dish. My sautes are not like stews, in 
which all the ingredients are jumbled together in a 
sauce. With a saute, I can arrange the food on my 
plate to make it look really appetizing_ 
THE FI RST STEP IS TO SEASON WELL 
To prepare the saute, I first season my main ingredi­
ent, which is fish in the two recipes I'm discussing in 
this article. The seasoning could be just salt and pep­
per, or it could be a marinade. I always use sea salt 
from Brittany, partly from loyalty to my home and 
partly because of its wonderful flavor. The salt is a 
grayish, coarse grain that's completely unrefined. It 
has a faint flavor of violets; I can really taste the dif­
ference between this salt and regular salt. 
FI E COOKI G

--- Page 31 ---
In the monkfish recipe (see photo on p. 34) , I 
marinate the fish for extra flavor. Monkfish absorbs 
flavors easily, so I use the best quality extra-virgin 
olive oil, freshly grated ginger, and fresh lemon 
juice. I don't marinate for more than an hour, how­
ever, because I don't want the acidic lemon juice to 
"cook" the fish. 
I like to season with fresh herbs, too. Parsley, 
rosemary, and thyme are good choices for seasoning 
the fish before cooking because these herbs can 
stand up to the heat of the saute pan. The more ten­
der, fragile herbs, like tarragon, chervil, chives, and 
basil, are good additions to the finished sauce. 
CORRECT SAUTEI NG MAKES 
THIS DISH WORK 
The next and perhaps most important step in a saute 
is browning the main ingredients in a little fat­
sauteing. The best pan to use is a saute pan, called a 
sauteuse or sautoir in French. The pan should be wide 
enough to accommodate all the ingredients in one 
layer. Some saute pans have straight sides, some 
have sloping; either style will do. The sides must be 
high enough to contain the amount of liquid I use 
to make the sauce, but low enough for the liquid to 
evaporate quickly and for me to get my spatula in 
the pan easily. 
In my restaurant's kitchen, I have nothing but 
very heavy gauge copper pans with nickel lining. 
A few years ago, when the dollar was strong against 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
the French franc, I bought a whole containerful 
of wonderful copper from Dehillerin, the famous 
Parisian cookware store. Copper pans are great 
for browning because they conduct heat so quickly 
and evenly, and the nickel lining is good for 
dishes that contain wine or vinegar, because 
the acid doesn't attack the metal the way it would 
with aluminum. Aluminum also can give light­
colored sauces a gray tinge. Whatever pan you use, 
be sure it's very heavy with a flat bottom for even 
heat distribution. Nonstick pans aren't great 
because you need the juices from the ingredients 
to leave a residue stuck in the pan so you can make 
a sauce. This doesn't always happen with non­
stick pans. 
Go easy on the lemon 
juice or the marinade 
will be too acidic and 
the fish will "cook" in 
it. The fish shouldn't 
stay in the marinade 
more than an hour, ei­
ther. Berruet inserts a 
fork in the lemon half 
to make squeezing 
easy and to help sieve 
out any seeds. 
Uvely heat is critical 
for a good saute. A 
hot pan and hot fat 
will keep the fish from 
sticking by forming a 
crust on the fish the 
instant it hits the pan. 
It's important to 
brown the fish well for 
good flavor in the fish 
and in the sauce. 
31

--- Page 32 ---
The beginning of a 
beautiful sauce. At 
this point, the white 
wine and chicken 
stock are mixing with 
caramelized onions 
and delicious cooked­
on juices from the 
sauteed fish to form a 
flavorful liquid that 
will be simmered until 
slightly thickened. 
32 
I like to use olive oil or a mixture of olive oil and 
butter to brown the ingredients for my sautes. Butter 
on its own will burn, but blending butter and oil 
gives me a little butter flavor plus the ability to use 
really high heat, which is critical to a good saute. If 
the pan and fat are not hot enough, the fish will stick 
to the pan. With really hot fat, a crust is formed the 
instant you put the fish in the pan, and this crust 
keeps it from sticking. You also want high heat for 
good caramelization, both on the fish itself and also 
in the little bits and pieces that stay in the pan. 
These caramelized bits will add flavor to the sauce. 
(See photo on p. 3 1.) 
Brown the fish on both sides, turning delicate 
ones, like cod, carefully with a spatula so they don't 
fall apart. At this stage, cook the fish until it's al­
most, but not quite, done. It should still be a little 
underdone because it will keep cooking in its own 
heat while you make the sauce, and because you're 
going to reheat the fish in the sauce later. 
A QUICK SAUCE MADE IN THE SAUTE PAN 
When the fish is browned, take it out of the pan and 
keep it warm on a plate covered with foil. I use the 
warming shelf above my range at home. 
Now you're ready to make the sauce. First de­
grease, another very important step because you 
don't want any extra fat in the dish, and definitely no 
grease floating on the sauce. Pour off the excess but­
ter or oil, but don't actually wipe out the pan be­
cause you risk wiping away the flavorful residue in 
the bottom. 
The next step is called deglazing, which means 
adding liquid to the saute pan and boiling to dis­
solve all the good cooked-on bits and to reduce 
and concentrate the liquid. Sometimes I'll cook 
the garnish ingredients, like the onions in the cod 
recipe (see photo on p. 34) , in the pan before I 
add liquid and deglaze; sometimes I add liquid 
straight away. 
The most common liquids to use in sautes are 
wine, stock, and spirits like cognac, calvados, or­
in the monkfish recipe-rum. I also like to use 
cider, which is a traditional drink in Brittany. 
French cider is very dry, has about 8 percent alco­
hol and is slightly sparkling. It's not at all like 
American apple cider. 
IfI'm using spirits, I usually flame them first. This 
burns off the alcohol quickly and it also toasts the 
sugars in the spirit, giving a more mellow flavor. For 
alcohol like wine, flaming isn't necessary because 
the alcohol level is so low; in fact, it probably 
wouldn't even flame. 
Flaming is a tricky and dangerous thing, and I 
recommend it only if you pay close attention to 
what you're doing. The vapors in hot alcohol are 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 33 ---
Meat glaze 
Meat glaze, called glace de viande (GLASS duh 
vee-AHND) in French, is a concentrated, gelati­
nous paste made by slowly and carefully reduc­
ing brown veal stock to about one-tenth of its 
original volume. A glaze can be made from fish 
or poultry stock also, but meat glaze is the most 
common. It is mainly used in sauces, but a 
spoonful or two can add flavor and color to 
other dishes like stews or soups as well. 
To make about two cups of meat glaze, 
simmer five quarts of good-quality brown veal 
stock in a large pot, skimming about every 
fifteen minutes for the first couple of hours, 
then occasionally after that. Wipe away any 
scorched residue on the inside of the pot to 
keep the glaze from acquiring a burnt flavor. 
When the stock has reduced by about half, 
transfer it into a smaller, clean pot and con­
tinue reducing until the liquid has a very 
syrupy consistency. Strain the glaze into a 
clean container to cool; it will become firm 
and rubbery. Store the glaze in the refrigerator 
for up to two months. 
If you don't want to make your own meat 
glaze, you can buy it from Summerfield Farm, 
1 0044 James Monroe Highway, Culpeper, 
VA 2270 1 ; 703/547-9600 (8 ounces is $7.50; 
very volatile, so when they're ignited, the flames 
climb quickly and high. They die down instantly, 
too, but if you're not careful, you can singe your 
hair, clothes, or curtains with the first burst of flame. 
Always stand with your face well away from the 
pan. If you choose not to flame, just let the spirits 
simmer so the alcohol burns off. 
During deglazing, scrape all the browned bits 
from the bottom of the saute pan with a spoon. Let 
the liquid boil until it's reduced to a rich consis­
tency-not thick, but concentrated in flavor and 
slightly syrupy in consistency. Then add the finish­
ing touches. A little cream or butter for richness, a 
little lemon juice or capers for sharpness, fresh herbs 
for color and fragrance. Let these ingredients cook 
together for a few minutes, but if you've added but­
ter, don't boil the sauce or the butter will separate 
and the sauce will be oily. Return the fish to the pan 
and let it simmer a few minutes in the sauce to com­
plete the cooking and to blend all the flavors. Now 
you're ready to serve your saute a la minute, full of 
fresh and lively flavor. I like to serve plain pasta, 
rice, or steamed potatoes with my sautes to soak up 
the delicious sauce. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
32 ounces is $20, plus shipping; minimum 
order is $65). You can also buy a similar ingre­
dient called demi-glaze (which has only half 
the concentration of a true glaze) from 
D' Artagnan, Inc. ( l/800-DARTAGNan) . Theirs 
is a veal and duck stock (6.5 ounces is $5, plus 
shipping) that was delicious in Chef Berruet's 
monkfish recipe. If you use demi-glaze, use 
twice the quantity called for in the recipe and 
reduce it a little longer. 
-Martha Holmberg, Fine Cooking 
SAUTE OF COD WITH CAPERS AND ONIONS 
All the ingredients in this dish are easy to come by, so you 
don't have to wait for a special occasion to make it. Cod 
is one of my favorite types of fish, and it doesn't get the 
credit it deserves. Fresh, good-quality cod is sweet and 
mild, with firm white flakes. Use fillets or steaks for this 
recipe. I would serve this dish with a fruity sauvignon blanc. 
Serves four. 
4 cod fillets or steaks, about 6 oz. each 
Salt and pepper 
1 Tbs. olive oil 
6 Tbs. butter 
2 large onions, sliced thin 
1 cup dry white wine 
V-t cup reduced-salt chicken stock 
2 small sour pickles (cornichons), cut in julienne 
1 Tbs. drained capers 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh parsley 
Rinse the cod and pat dry. Season with salt and pepper. (If 
you're using cod steaks, leave the skin and bone intact dur­
ing cooking to help the fish hold together. After cooking, 
just peel off the skin and pull out the bone.) 
Heat the olive oil and 2 Tbs. of the butter in a large 
saute pan. When the fat is hot, add the fish and saute over 
medium-high heat until light brown, about 3 min. on each 
side. Remove the fish with a spatula and keep it warm. Pour 
off all but 1 Tbs. of the fat and add the sliced onions. Cook 
the onions over medium heat, stirring frequently, until 
Meat glaze adds 
deep flavor to the 
monkfish sauce. The 
meat glaze melts from 
a thick jelly into a rich 
amber liquid that will 
mix with rum, cream, 
and lemon juice. While 
meat glaze is time­
consuming to make, a 
little goes a long way, 
and it lasts months in 
the refrigerator. 
33

--- Page 34 ---
When you know the 
basics of sauteing, 
making this cod dish 
is a snap. Onions, 
pickles, capers, and 
parsley come together 
in an unusual and sat­
isfying garnish for the 
mild sauteed cod. The 
ingredients are easy to 
find, so you can make 
the dish anytime. 
The flavors in this 
monkfish saute are 
deep and delicious. 
The meat glaze and 
rum give it real depth, 
the ginger and lemon 
juice add spark, and 
the cream rounds off 
the whole thing. 
Chopped chives are a 
colorful touch. 
34 
they're soft and caramelized, 8 to 1 0 min. 
Add the wine and stock and a little salt and pepper. Boil, 
scraping the bottom of the pan, until the liquid is reduced 
by about half and has a slightly syrupy consistency. 
Put the fish and any accumulated juices back in the pan 
and cook for another minute or so, basting the fish with 
the sauce. 
Add the remaining 4 Tbs. of butter and shake the pan 
until the butter is blended into the sauce. Do not boil, or 
the butter will separate and the sauce will be oily. Add the 
julienned pickle, capers, and parsley. 
Arrange the fish on warmed individual plates or on a 
platter and spoon the sauce over the fish. 
SAUTE OF MONKFISH WITH GINGER AND RUM 
I developed this dish after a visit to the West Indian island of 
Martinique, hence the rum. There they use cane syrup in­
stead of honey. The meat glaze (see box on p. 33) in the 
sauce is strictly French, but I think it adds real depth of flavor. 
You can omit it, but the character of the dish will be different. 
Use a little more cream to make up the difference in volume 
of liquid. Monkfish is a very juicy fish, so I use a little flour and 
egg wash to help seal in the juices. My choice of wine for this 
dish would be a full-bodied, buttery California chardonnay or 
a rich French chardonnay like a Meursault. Serves four. 
1 '12 lb. monkfish, cut into I-in. slices 
6 Tbs. olive oil 
2 Tbs. grated fresh ginger 
1 Tbs. crushed black peppercorns 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh parsley 
Lemon juice 
Flour 
Egg wash (1 egg beaten with a few drops of olive oil and 
lemon juice, and salt and pepper) 
3 Tbs. dark rum 
6 Tbs. meat glaze 
2 tsp. honey 
'12 cup heavy cream 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh chives 
Gently press the monkfish slices to flatten them slightly 
and pat dry. Mix half the olive oil with the ginger, pepper­
corns, parsley, and 2 tsp. lemon juice in a shallow dish. 
Arrange the monkfish in the dish , turning to coat with 
the marinade, and leave for 30 to 60 min. Remove the fish 
and wipe off all marinade. 
Spread some flour on a piece of foil and put the egg 
wash in a shallow dish. Dip each piece of monkfish first in 
flour, shaking off the excess, then in egg wash. Do this 
immediately before you start to cook; the coating will be­
come gooey if you let it sit more than a few minutes. 
Heat the remaining 3 Tbs. olive oil in a saute pan 
and when it's hot, add the monkfish. Saute the fish over 
medium-high heat until light brown, about 3 min. per 
side, then remove the fish from the pan. Pour off the fat, 
return the fish to the pan, and add the rum. If you choose 
to flame the rum, stand back, dip a lighted match into the 
pan, and shake the pan until the flames subside. If you 
don't flame, just simmer about 30 seconds. Remove the 
fish again and keep it warm. 
Add the meat glaze and bring it to a boil, scraping up 
the browned bits from the bottom of the pan. Add the 
honey and cream and boil for a few minutes to reduce 
slightly. Add salt, pepper, and more lemon juice to taste 
(the sauce should have a nice acidic edge to it). If the fish 
needs reheating, put it back in the pan and heat for a few 
seconds in the sauce. Otherwise, arrange the fish on a 
warmed platter or on individual plates and pour the sauce 
over it. Sprinkle with chopped chives. 
Fill pots on the stove. 
The author had a 
faucet plumbed into 
the top of his range so 
he doesn't have to lug 
pots of water from the 
kitchen sink. 
Jean-Charles Berruet came to Nantucket from 
France 28 years ago, adopted it as his new homeland, 
and has never left. Since 1 970, he has been chef 
and owner, with his wife Anne, of The Chanticleer, 
an award-winning restaurant in the historic village 
of Siasconset. • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 35 ---
Vegetables Make the Meal 
Meatless main dish pleases 
the palate and the eye 
BY KAYSEY MclOUGHLIN 
I 've been a vegetarian all my life, so I'm never at a 
loss for main dish ideas. New or part-time vege­
tarians, however, can find it difficult to make vege­
tables into main courses. While most cooks have a 
large repertoire of favorite salads and side dishes, 
they draw a blank when it comes to using vegetables 
as the central course of the meal. 
In fact, when you abandon the notion that the 
main course must be meat, and when you realize the 
potential of the wide variety of delicious vegetables, 
fruits, legumes, and grains, you can enjoy great flex­
ibility. Carefully layered seasoning, robust stocks, 
and tantalizing sauces will ensure that your meat­
less recipe is interesting and satisfying enough to be 
the focus of the meal. 
THE KEY TO FULL FLAVOR 
This stuffed crookneck squash with tomato and 
pink-grapefruit sauce is one of my "signature dishes," 
often requested by my friends, whether vegetarian or 
not. The stuffing and sauce can be prepared up to 
one day ahead, but I wouldn't steam the squash 
more than an hour ahead of serving, to preserve its 
sweet flavor and tender texture. 
I don't use too many spices and flavorings in this 
dish, but the ones I do include play an important 
role. Some contrast with the main ingredients to 
provide tension-mild vs. peppery, sweet vs. acid. 
Others amplify the primary flavors, extending the 
range from high and light to deep and dark. 
Understanding this "spectrum" of flavors is 
key to good vegetarian cooking. Many vegetables 
provide flavors at the high end of the range-fresh, 
bright, grassy, green, peppery. The full, earthy fla­
vors that make a dish rounder and mellower (and 
f more reassuring to "meat-eaters") need to come 
j! from skillful seasoning and cooking. 
-€ 
Some "deep-end" seasonings include a splash of ୄ
 '<:o..ʒ 
aged soy sauce, a pinch of woody, brown spice 
(such as coriander, cumin, or clove) , a rich reduced 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Vegetable main courses are hearty 
and savory. Here, the flavors and 
colors of stuffed crookneck squash 
are highlighted beautifully by a 
tomato and pink-grapefruit sauce. 
35

--- Page 36 ---
CROOKNECK SQUASH 
WITH CREOLE VEGETABLE 
STUFFING 
Serves four. 
8 small (3-ounce) or 4 large 
(6-ounce) crookneck squash 
2 cups all-purpose vegetable stock 
(see recipe at right, or use a 
stock cube) 
11I teaspoon salt 
Y., cup pearl barley 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 é teaspoon finely chopped garlic 
-v., cup chopped onion 
é cup finely diced carrot 
11I teaspoon ground nutmeg 
11I teaspoon ground cayenne 
é cup finely diced celery 
é cup finely diced green pepper 
-v., cup fresh corn kernels 
é teaspoon finely chopped 
fresh rosemary 
1 teaspoon chopped fresh thyme 
Y., teaspoon Tabasco, more 
to taste 
Y., teaspoon salt 
TOMATO AND PINK­
GRAPEFRUIT SAUCE 
Makes about 3 cups. 
5 tablespoons unsalted butter 
é teaspoon finely chopped garlic 
1 tablespoon rice-wine vinegar 
Juice from 1 pink grapefruit 
2 pounds tomatoes, peeled, 
seeded, and chopped, about 
2é cups 
Peeled segments from 1 pink 
grapefruit, cut in é-inch chunks 
(see Basics) 
Pinch ground cayenne 
é teaspoon fresh thyme 
Salt 
36 
The author carves the crookneck squash into 
hollow containers, using a paring knife and 
melon bailer. 
vegetable stock (see the sidebar at right) , or even a 
few drops of molasses or Louisiana cane syrup. 
Cooking sugary vegetables such as onions and 
carrots until lightly caramelized also adds full, mel­
low flavor. In this recipe, I'm using a mirepoix (pro­
nounced meer-ah-pwAH)-a mix of several diced 
Cut a deep slice from the "bowl" of the squash to 
aromatic vegetables added for flavoring. Grilling or 
form the lid and to open the squash for carving. 
charring larger vegetables will also add deeper, 
earthier flavors to a vegetarian dish. 
A WHOLE SQUASH AS FOCAL POINT 
I've chosen yellow crookneck squash as the main 
ingredient for its mildly sweet flavor and smooth 
buttery texture, but also for its shape. By featuring 
a whole vegetable, rather than chunks or slices, 
this dish takes on more of a "main dish" character. 
You could almost equate the whole squash with 
a fillet of fish or a chop (though I certainly 
wouldn't! ) . If possible, choose unblemished, firm 
Use just the tip of a paring knife for greater control 
young squash, because the pulp and seeds, which 
when tracing around the edge of the cut face. 
are used in the stuffing, are sweet and moist. In 
more mature squash, the pulp and seeds will be 
coarse and dry. Regular yellow summer squash can 
be substituted, but the texture is more watery and 
the shape is not as pretty. 
I carve out the rounded "bowl" of the crook­
neck squash to form a hollow container for the 
barley-and-vegetable stuffing. After steaming the 
squash containers, I fill them with the stuffing and 
then bake them briefly to unite the flavors of all 
the ingredients. 
Carve a n d ste a m the squash. Wash the 
A few deep slashes will loosen the pulp for easy 
squash, blot them dry, and trim the dry stem ends. 
removal. 
To decide where to slice the squash so that it sits 
attractively on the plate, place it on the counter 
and let it roll into its natural resting position. Cut 
a thick slice from the long side that's now parallel 
to the counter, to form a lid (see the photos at 
left) . With the tip of a paring knife, carefully score 
a line Y4-inch in from the edge of the cut face of 
the squash to make a border. Cut several slashes 
across the surface, and then scoop out the pulp 
with a melon bailer or a small spoon to form a hol­
low container. Repeat with the other squash. 
Chop the pulp fine and set aside. 
McLoughlin scoops out the pulp easily with a 
The squash needs very brief cooking because the 
melon bailer. She's careful not to make the walls 
thin walls in the hollowed-out portion will collapse 
too thick, which wouldn't allow enough room for 
and tear if overcooked. To stop the cooking im-
the stuffing, nor too thin, because they could tear. 
mediately after you remove the squash from the 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 37 ---
steamer, put them in a large bowl of ice water. Steam 
the squash in a covered steamer, 6 to 7 minutes for 
the squash containers and 2 to 3 minutes for the lids. 
Immerse them in the ice water, remove them imme­
diately, drain, and pat dry. 
A G RAIN AND VEG ETABLE STUFFING 
The starch from the barley will mix with the stock 
and help bind the vegetables. The grain also adds 
an appealing chewiness. 
Cook the barley first, before beginning your 
mirepoix. Bring 1 Y4 cups of the stock and the salt to 
a boil. Add the barley, cover, and simmer until the 
stock has been absorbed and the barley is plump and 
tender, 30 to 40 minutes. Set aside. 
lightly brown the mirepoix. I use butter in this 
recipe because I like the slightly nutty flavor it gives 
the stuffing, but olive oil would work, too. The 
brown, woody flavor of the nutmeg and the slight 
caramelization of the mirepoix vegetables add depth 
of flavor to the dish. 
Heat the butter in a large frying pan until just 
foaming, add the garlic and onion, and saute over 
medium-high heat until the onion turns clear. Add 
the carrot, nutmeg, and cayenne and continue 
cooking until the carrot is slightly soft and the onion 
begins to caramelize. Stir in the squash pulp, celery, 
green pepper, corn, and rosemary, and cook until the 
vegetables soften, another 3 to 5 minutes. 
Finish cooking the stuffing. Add the remaining 
stock, the barley, thyme, Tabasco, and salt. Cook 
until all the ingredients are tender and the stock has 
reduced and been absorbed, stirring frequently, 10 to 
1 2 minutes. Season with salt to taste and remove 
from the heat. 
Fill the squash containers. Packing the stuffing 
firmly into the hollowed-out squash and then re­
heating everything together improves the dish by 
allowing the flavors to marry. Fill each squash with 
the stuffing, packing firmly with a spoon yet taking 
care not to tear the sides. If you like, the lids may be 
set back on top, or served alongside, topped with a 
spoonful of stuffing. Place all the filled squash and 
lids on a baking tray, cover with foil and bake at 
400°F until heated through, about 15 minutes. (If 
the squash have been stuffed ahead and refrigerated, 
reheat at 375° for 35 to 45 minutes.) Serve with 
Tomato and Pink-Grapefruit Sauce and a bottle of 
Cotes du Rhone. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Vegetable stock from 
peelings and parings 
ALL-PURPOSE 
VEGETABLE STOCK 
Makes 7 quart. 
All your accumulated scraps, 
including, or plus, the 
following: 
2 cups coarsely chopped onion 
7 cup coarsely chopped celery 
2 cups coarsely chopped 
crookneck squash or 2 corn 
cobs, cut in pieces 
7.v., cups coarsely chopped 
carrot 
7 cup seeded and coarsely 
chopped green pepper 
I make an all-purpose vegetable stock 
from the remnants of several days of 
cooking-trimmings and peelings that 
might otherwise be wasted, which I 
hoard like a small treasure in an acces­
sible container just inside my freezer. 
When I'm ready to make the stock, I 
inventory what I've saved by just look­
ing at the frozen "lump" to see what 
vegetables I need more or less of. I add 
a mirepoix and a little seasoning to 
round out the flavor. In this way, inten­
sity and usefulness are standardized. 
7 cup coarsely chopped tomato 
Ƶ tsp. black peppercorns 
Ƶ tsp. coriander seed 
Ƶ tsp. fennel seed 
70 stems parsley, cilantro, or 
thyme, or a combination 
7 bay leaf 
3 cloves garlic 
3 quarts water 
Bring to a boil, simmer 
approximately 1 Y2 hours until 
reduced by ?-'3, then strain. 
A SPARKLING SAUCE 
Good items to collect for all­
purpose stock include corn cobs and 
husks, snow-pea strings, tiny garlic 
cloves too small for peeling and chop­
ping, tomato skins and seeds, eggplant 
skins, clean potato parings, lettuce, 
and bits of apple or pear. If you're not 
sure whether an ingredient will add a 
nice flavor, simmer it on its own in 
water and then taste it. If you like it, 
add it to the main stock pot. 
Throw away woody stems, rough 
peelings, hard seeds, and blemished, 
gritty, or too-old pieces-remember 
you're going to eat this.-K.McL. 
In this easy recipe, pink grapefruit is an unexpected 
ingredient that adds a lot of fruitiness and a nice bit­
ter edge. Rice-wine vinegar adds another sweet­
sharp note. (If! don't have rice-wine vinegar, I use a 
drop of honey and white-wine vinegar.) 
In a large frying pan (preferably not cast iron), heat 
2 tablespoons butter and saute the garlic until golden. 
Add the vinegar and grapefruit juice, and simmer 
over high heat until reduced by half, 2 to 3 minutes. 
This is important, because if the liquid isn't reduced 
enough, the sauce will be too thin and taste acidic. 
Add the chopped tomato and the grapefrUit pieces 
and cook over medium heat for about 5 minutes. 
Tum off the heat, add the cayenne and thyme, and 
then whisk in the remaining butter. Add salt to taste. 
Kaysey McLoughlin has cooked professionally in fine 
restaurants for over a decade, in Chicago, New York, 
and New Orleans. She recently moved to Tennessee 
with her husband and her baby son, who is a third­
generation vegetarian. • 
37

--- Page 38 ---
Fresh fruit and a little 
sugar make intensely 
flavored preserves. 
Fruit butters are 
smooth and readily 
spreadable. Fruit 
cheeses are smooth, 
too, but firm enough 
to mold and slice.

--- Page 39 ---
Making Flavorful 
Fruit Butters and Cheeses 
Old--fashioned preserves for health--conscious cooks 
Unless you read old cookbooks, you 
may not know about fruit butters 
and fruit cheeses. Despite the names 
"cheese" and "butter," they are not dairy 
products, but rather intensely flavorful 
fruit spreads. Because they require some­
what less sugar than do most jams, these 
old-fashioned preserves are ideal for to­
day's health-conscious cooks. In general, a 
fruit butter has a smooth, rather thick con­
sistency and is readily spreadable. A fruit 
cheese also is smooth, but it's dense 
enough to hold its shape from a mold, and 
it can be cut into soft slices or wedges, 
hence the use of the term "cheese." Both 
preserves contain fruit, very small quanti­
ties of water, and moderate quantities of 
sugar, sometimes with the addition of fla­
vorings or spices. Fruit butters and cheeses 
differ from jam because of their smooth, 
seedless texture, which is achieved by pass­
ing the cooked fruit through a sieve before 
adding the sugar and continuing to cook. 
I have a particular interest in cookery 
and preserving from late Victorian and 
Edwardian household practices because of 
my family, Anglo-Irish colonials, who ar­
rived in Canada in the early 19th century. 
A long-lived and sprightly group, their tra­
ditions did not fade, and I grew up among 
three generations of women who baked 
and canned with little regard for the pass­
ing decades. I grew up eating the fruit but­
ters and cheeses that my grandmother and 
great-aunts made, but many people are un­
familiar with these special preserves, save 
for apple butter, a kind of thickened apple­
sauce, usually heavily spiced. To me apple 
butter is not the best example of this type 
of preserve, because the real beauty of fruit 
butters and cheeses lie in their intense fruit 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
BY AMANDA BURTON 
flavor, unmasked by heavy-handed spices. 
Fruit butters and cheeses are memo­
rable condiments. Excellent with toast or 
scones, they also add a welcome dimen­
sion to a simple meal of cold meats, 
cheese, and bread. They can flavor oat­
meal or plain yogurt, top waffles or pan­
cakes, and fill blintzes or crepes. They go 
well with warm-from-the-oven bread 
pudding or homemade tapioca pudding. 
Fruit butters also make wonderful fillings 
for little tart shells or pastry cases. They 
can add a touch of summer's best fruits 
just when winter is at its dreariest. 
TIPS FOR SUCCESSFUL PRESERVING 
Recipes for fruit butters and cheeses from 
various authors and eras are maddeningly 
inconsistent. Nineteenth-century recipes 
leave a great deal up to the presumed skill 
of the cook, whereas today's recipes are 
more detailed and precise. At first I 
thought the breezy writing style of a hun­
dred years ago was merely quaint, until I 
began to realize the implications. Preserv­
ing is an inexact and intuitive science be­
cause success depends on a host of vari­
ables that no recipe can predict. The 
relative ripeness of the fruit, or the propor­
tion of ripe fruit to green, determines the 
acid level and the pectin, sugar, and water 
content of the cooked pulp. In confec­
tionery and preserving processes, cane 
sugar behaves differently from beet sugar 
(see "Sugar," at right), and the two are of­
ten unidentifiable by brand. Cooking pots 
and stoves vary in ways that affect times 
and temperatures; a drafty kitchen on a 
cold day can measurably slow things down. 
All these things require you to reinterpret 
a recipe uniquely each time you make it. 
Here is my advice to help you do this: 
Fruit-Fruit that's slightly green has 
more pectin (which helps the preserve 
to set) , more acid, less sugar and less 
water than fully ripe fruit. A proportion 
of 75 percent fully ripe to 25 percent 
slightly green fruit is desirable. Preserv­
ing should not be viewed as a way to use 
up overripe or blemished fruit, because 
bruised or blemished flesh will change 
the chemistry of the batch. 
Water-The fruit itself contains water, 
but you'll need to add more during cook­
ing as well, because you need enough 
water to break down the structure of the 
fruit and to prevent sticking. However, the 
more water you add, the longer you have 
to cook to evaporate it. Prolonged cook­
ing does nothing for the flavor of the fruit, 
which was at its peak before you started 
cooking. Before cooking, squeeze or mash 
the fruit to express some of its own juice. 
Add no more water than you need to pre­
vent initial sticking. The water that clings 
to the fruit from washing may be ade­
quate. Remember that water weighs 
approximately one pound per pint. Later, 
when you weigh your fruit pulp to deter­
mine how much sugar to add, the final re­
sult will be affected by whatever water has 
not evaporated in the first cooking. 
Sugar-Cane sugar will produce a 
sweeter finished product. You may like 
this or not, but don't alter the amount of 
sugar you use to change the taste because 
you'll also alter the chemistry of the set­
ting process. Beet sugar has more impuri­
ties and so produces more scum during 
cooking which you must remove, slightly 
reducing your yield. Some recipes suggest 
heating sugar in the oven before adding it 
39

--- Page 40 ---
to the fruit; the purpose of this is to avoid 
sudden drops of temperature to the batch. 
I've found that there's no need for this 
step if I add sugar slowly, stirring to pre­
vent the formation oflumps. 
Equipment-Your pot should be heavy 
to prevent scorching and nonreactive 
(stainless steel or enameled) so no metallic 
flavor is imparted to the fruit, which is 
acidic. Stove burners vary in their speci­
fied thermal output; this means only you 
can know how high a flame to use to 
achieve a good, even boil without risk of 
scorching. Because of this variance, recipe 
times are often meaningless. Do what you 
can to block significant drafts around your 
stove, because they'll slow you down and 
make hot-packing (putting the boiling-hot 
preserves into equally hot, sterile canning 
jars) a fevered race against the chill. If your 
batch doesn't seem thick enough, keep 
cooking regardless of the clock. 
If you keep my advice in mind, the 
general procedure and the recipes that 
follow should make intuitive sense and 
seem simple, as indeed cooks thought 
they were a hundred years ago. 
THE G ENERAL PROCEDURE 
Remove all the stems and leaves from the 
fruit, wash it well, and drain it in a colan­
der. Cut away any bruises or blemishes 
completely. Cut large fruit in quarters and 
remove large stones. If you're using a 
motor-driven pureeing tool, such as the 
Cuisinart Power Strainer attachment, it 
The difference between froth and scum. The froth 
that rises from the fruit during the first boiling 
(shown above) is simply fruit juice. Don't remove it. 
40 
isn't necessary to seed, stone, core, or peel 
most fruit. If you don't have such a tool, 
the traditional method calls for pressing 
the fruit through a sieve to separate it 
from its skin, seeds, and stones. 
Crush the fruit slightly to release 
enough juice to prevent sticking during 
cooking, or add the smallest amount of 
water necessary to do the same. Cook the 
fruit, stirring often, over moderate heat 
until it's quite soft. A froth will rise while 
the fruit is boiling. This is not the same as 
the sugar scum that happens later; so don't 
remove it. Cool the fruit slightly and then 
puree. Weigh the resulting pulp to deter­
mine the amount of sugar to be added. For 
a fruit butter, the proportion is usually 
eight ounces of sugar per pound of pulp, or 
a ratio of one to two. A fruit cheese gen­
erally requires more sugar, between twelve 
and sixteen ounces per pound of pulp. 
Return the pulp to a clean pot and add 
the sugar gradually over moderate heat, 
Do remove the scum that rises during the second 
boiling (see above), which comes from impurities in 
the sugar. Skim it off with a perforated metal spoon. 
stirring to prevent lumps. Stir often to pre­
vent sticking and skim the scum that rises 
to the surface as the mixture boils. Use a 
clean, perforated skimmer for this task. 
Clean the skimmer frequently in warm 
water, wiping it dry after each cleaning. 
Continue cooking until the mixture is 
thick and creamy for a butter, or until a 
spoon drawn through the mixture leaves 
a clean line at the bottom of the pot for a 
cheese. You can pour fruit butters into jars 
or cheeses into molds or small terrines 
which have been painted inside with 
food-grade glycerin (available at pharma­
cies) or a flavorless oil such as canola oil. 
Or you can hot-pack butters and cheeses 
in canning jars following standard can­
ning procedures. For more information on 
canning, see Putting Food By, by Janet 
Greene, Ruth Hertzberg, and Beatrice 
Vaughan (Viking Press, 1 988. $ 12.95, 
softcover; 420 pp. ISBN 0-8289-0645-9). 
A power sieve purees the fruit quickly and 
quietly. The author swears by her Cuisinart Power 
Strainer, an attachment that fits inside a citrus 
juicer. The alternative is to work the cooked fruit 
through a sieve. 
Store preserves packed in molds or clamp­
lidded jars in the refrigerator; if you've 
canned them with two-piece, screw-on 
lids, store them in the pantry. 
Notice the absence of times and tem­
peratures in my recipes. Making fruit 
butters and cheeses is a simple process, 
and these preserves are reliably finished 
when they behave as I've described 
above. Your methods don't always have 
to be perfect. I undercooked a batch of 
peach butter, which consequently didn't 
set. A week later I boiled it again briefly, 
and it set beautifully. 
Set aside a whole day to spend on this 
project, so you can complete four or five 
recipes. Your pantry will fill up in a satis­
fying way. 
TOKAY GRAPE BUTTER 
Look for Tokay grapes, which are mottled red 
over green, during the grape-harvest season. 
Here in California that's early September and 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 41 ---
To prevent spoilage, be sure the storage jar or 
mold is perfectly clean. Wipe the rim of a canning 
jar with a damp towel to ensure a good seal. A 
small amount of matter, even juice, will prevent a 
perfect vacuum seal. 
October. Or use any grape with an interesting, 
distinctive flavor. Yields three 8-ounce jars. 
4 lb. grapes 
Water 
Sugar 
Wash and stem the grapes. Add no more 
than 1 cup of water and cook until tender and 
collapsed. Process through a Power Strainer 
or sieve. Weigh the pulp and add 8 oz. of 
sugar for each pound of pulp. Cook until thick 
and creamy, stirring often and skimming the 
scum that rises while boiling. Hot-pack in 
canning jars. 
PEACH BUTTER 
Yields three to four 8-ounce jars. 
Slice 4 lb. peaches, discarding stones. (If the 
skins are thick and fuzzy, blanch and peel them 
before you slice them.) Cook with 1 to 2 cups 
of water, depending on juiciness of fruit, until 
very soft. Proceed as for Tokay Grape Butter. 
PLUM BUTTER 
Yields three to four 8-ounce jars. 
Wash and stem 4 lb. plums. Crush a few to 
produce enough juice to prevent sticking, 
adding a little water if needed. Cover and 
cook until tender and collapsed. Proceed as for 
Tokay Grape Butter. 
PRUNE BUTTER 
Yields six 8-ounce jars. 
Soak 4 lb. pitted prunes ovemight in water to 
cover. Simmer in the same water until tender. 
Proceed as for Tokay Grape Butter, adding the 
juice and grated rind of 1 lemon during the 
second cooking. 
JU E/JULY 1994 
Enjoy the intense fla­
vors of summer fruits 
throughout the year. 
You can hot-pack fruit 
butters in two-piece, 
screw-top canning 
jars and store them 
in the cupboard. 
Fruit cheeses can 
be packed into 
small molds and 
stored in the 
refrigerator. 
BLACKBERRY OR RASPBERRY CHEESE 
Yields three 8-ounce jars. 
2 lb. blackberries or raspberries 
Water 
Sugar 
Rinse and pick over the berries. Add the least 
amount of water possible to prevent sticking. 
Cover and simmer until very soft. 
Process through a Power Strainer or sieve. 
Weigh the pulp and add 1 4 oz. of sugar to 
each pound of pulp. Cook, stirring frequently 
and skimming the scum that rises while boil­
ing, until a spoon drawn through the mixture 
leaves a clean line behind it on the bottom of 
the pan. Hot-pack into canning jars, or pour 
into molds or small terrines painted with fla­
vorless oil or food-grade glycerin. 
CRANBERRY CHEESE 
Yields three to four 8-ounce jars. 
Boil 2 lb. cranberries in water to cover until very 
tender. Process through a Power Strainer or 
sieve. Weigh the pulp and add a pound of sugar 
for each pound of pulp. Proceed as for Black­
berry Cheese. If you like, add the juice and rind 
of one orange for every 2 lb. of cranberry pulp 
during the second cooking; this will lengthen 
the cooking time somewhat. 
CHERRY CHEESE 
Yields three to four 8-ounce jars. 
Wash and stem 4 lb. cherries. Mash or squeeze 
them slightly to release the juice; add just 
enough water to prevent sticking. Cook until 
tender and proceed as for Blackberry Cheese. 
DAMSON CHEESE 
Yields three to four 8-ounce jars. 
Remove stems and leaves and wash 4 lb. dam­
sons. Squeeze to express juice; add less than a 
cup of water if needed to prevent sticking. 
Cook until tender and proceed as for Black­
berry Cheese, adding 1,12 tsp. almond extract 
during the second cooking. 
In 1989, Amanda Burton started making 
and selling fruit curds and marmalades 
commercially. Her San Francisco Bay 
Area business, Burton & Company, sells 
its products at regional farmers' markets 
and specialty food stores. At this point, 
Burton only makes fruit butters and 
cheeses at home. • 
41

--- Page 42 ---
42 
• 
Jamaican .. Style 
Barbecue 
Jamaican jerk 
marinade is full of 
hot, spicy, and 
herbal ingredients, . 
like Scotch bonnet 
peppers, scallions, 
ginger, garlic, thyme, 
bay, cinnamon, 
peppercorns, nutmeg, 
and allspice. 
. Making and using hot and spicy "jerk" 
BY JAY B. McCARTHY 
Growing up in Jamaica, I learned to love the 
island food, especially the jerk-Jamaican 
barbecue-we ate at roadside stands. 
Despite its name, Jamaican jerk has no similari­
ties to dried meat jerky. The name comes from the 
way the meat was "jerked" (turned) regularly to en­
sure even cooking. And, like barbecue, the term jerk 
refers to the seasoning, the finished product, and the 
cooking method. 
Jerked meat is cooked slowly over a fire of green 
wood. In Jamaica, the wood-traditionally allspice 
(called pimento) , but sometimes other woods­
that's used to make the barbecue frame imparts half 
the luscious depth of flavor to jerked meats. The 
other half comes from the jerk marinade itself, which 
is made of herbs, spices, and Scotch bonnet peppers. 
When I began cooking in the United States, I 
explored ways to recreate the hot, spicy, herbal mix­
ture that haunted my palate. Now, as a chef, I regu­
larly incorporate jerk into my restaurant menu. The 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 43 ---
jerk mixture is easy to make, and it can be used on 
many kinds of meat, poultry, and fish. If the tradi­
tional method of roasting jerk over green wood 
doesn't suit you, you can use any kind of grill setup, 
a smoker, or your oven. 
TRADITIONAL AND 
NOT-SO-TRADITIONAl JERK 
In the past, pork was the only meat that was jerked. 
Freshly slaughtered pigs and wild boar were-and 
still are--chopped coarse, rubbed with the marinade, 
and then slowly roasted until well done with a crisp, 
crunchy outside. The meat is served hot with extra 
Scotch bonnet sauce or jerk marinade, and it's often 
accompanied by "festival," a fried cornmeal dump­
ling that's like a hushpuppy, but longer and sweet. 
Today, jerk stands in Jamaica offer both pork and 
chicken. They're the most affordable and readily 
available meats; beef is very scarce and expensive. 
Recently, jerked fish and jerked lobster have made 
their way onto restaurant menus both in Jamaica and 
in the United States. Jerked fish is often referred to as 
"slash and bum," from the slashing of the fish skin to 
help the flavors penetrate and the charring of the 
marinade as the fish is slowly roasted. Jerked lobster is 
boiled with jerk seasoning in the water, or split, rubbed 
with butter and jerk, and broiled. Due to the much 
shorter cooking times, the jerk doesn't permeate fish or 
lobster very deeply and is used more as a condiment. 
There are far more food items around the planet 
that lend themselves to be jerked than are available in 
baby red onions, but green scallions work fine. The 
thyme is a very small-leaved, intensely flavored Eng­
lish thyme. I prefer Jamaican allspice, which has more 
pungency than allspice from elsewhere. McCormick 
and Spice Islands both market Jamaican allspice. 
Scotch bonnet peppers add a big flavor to jerk (see 
Sources below) . They have what I think of as a 
"round" taste-intense heat 
Jamaica, however. I have 
made jerked rabbit, quail, 
SOURCES FOR SCOTCH BONNETS 
with apricot or fruity over­
tones. The best substitute for a 
Scotch bonnet is a fresh ha­
pheasant, and squab. My most 
AND HABANEROS 
recent innovation is Jerky 
Turkey, as I like to call it (see 
the recipe on p. 45) . Jerk is a 
Dean & Deluca, 560 Broadway, New York, 
NY 1 001 2; 800/221 -771 4 
fantas tic marinade for fish 
Don Alfonso Foods, PO Box 201 988, Austin, 
banero pepper, which is be­
coming increasingly available 
nationwide. (Frieda's Finest, a 
specialty produce distributor 
in California, sells a thousand 
pounds a day!) But to my 
taste, habaneros have all of 
the heat and none of the 
fruitiness of Scotch bonnets, 
so I always add a little honey 
or fruit jam or syrup when I 
use habaneras for jerk. 
steaks and grilled squash and 
TX 78720-1 988; 800/456-61 00. They grow 
eggplant. I've even made 
jerked breads to use as stuffing, 
and spread jerk on pizza crust. 
their own peppers; available in summer. 
Melissa's, PO Box 21 1 27, Los Angeles, CA 
90021 ; 800/588-01 51 . Peppers are imported: 
available year-round. 
J ERK: THE SEASON I N G 
Jerk is a thick paste, some­
times called jerk rub, which 
can be thinned with oil, vine­
Stonewall Chili Pepper Co., PO Box 241 , 
Stonewall, TX 78671 ; 800/232-2995. They 
grow their own peppers; available in summer. 
gar, or a combination of the two to make a pourable, 
saucelike marinade. You can also use soy sauce to 
thin jerk rub, but it isn't traditional. 
There are good commercial jerk seasonings avail­
able. Walkerswood is my favorite, though I always add 
a Scotch bonnet pepper or two for some extra heat. 
The best way, however, is to make the stuff yourself 
The core ingredients of jerk are scallions, thyme, 
allspice, Scotch bonnets, black pepper, nutmeg, and 
cinnamon. The scallions used in Jamaica are more like 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Most Jamaicans grind their dry ingredients by 
hand in a mortar and pestle. You'd never find a food 
processor at a jerk stand. The most advanced form 
of machine probably would be a hand-cranked meat 
grinder, followed closely by a machete. I think this 
hands-on approach gives Jamaican jerk that extra 
cup of love and caring that makes it taste so good, 
and it's why I prefer to hand-chop all the ingredi­
ents. If you're not so inclined, you can use a blender 
or food processor to process everything except the 
Jerk rub is versatile. 
The thick paste of 
herbs, spices, and pep· 
pers can be used to 
flavor many items, 
from pork to poultry 
to fish. In Jamaica, 
jerk pork is traditional, 
but McCarthy has 
found that stuffing 
jerk under the skin of 
a turkey breast pro­
duces delectable, 
moist, and pleasantly 
spicy results. 
43

--- Page 44 ---
Chopping the ingre­
dients by hand gives 
a better texture. 
When chopping the 
individual ingredients 
by hand, aim far 
pieces of consistent 
size. If you make jerk 
in a blender or food 
processor, be careful 
not to over process. 
And if you do use a 
machine to make jerk, 
you should still chop 
the thyme and pep­
pers by hand, or 
you'll end up with 
green mush. 
Fresh-ground spices 
make a world of dif­
ference, so McCarthy 
grinds his own. He 
keeps a coffee mill 
dedicated to the pur­
pose so he can make 
potent ground spices 
as needed. 
44 
thyme and Scotch bonnets, which you should mince 
by hand. This way you'll end up with jerk rub that 
has great texture instead of being just green mush. 
I'm also a firm believer in grinding my own spices 
fresh as I need them_ Whole spices keep their aro­
matic oils (and therefore their flavor) better than 
ground spices do. I simply pulverize whole spices in 
a coffee mill. 
JERK: THE PROCESS 
Jerking is a two-step process. First you marinate the 
meat for at least four hours; overnight is better. Then 
you slow-cook it, preferably over hardwood coals, be­
cause the sweet hardwood smoke contributes half 
the flavor of the finished jerk. Here in Texas, I use 
pecan, apple, or my favorite, peach. Maple, walnut, 
almond, or hickory would be fine, too. 
The traditional Jamaican way is to dig a pit about 
two feet deep and set stones or cinder blocks at each 
end to support the green sticks of the grill frame­
work about eight inches above the coals. The fire is 
started and when the coals are ready, the sticks are 
set in place, and the meat is put on the barbecue. 
Banana leaves used to be placed on top to help trap 
the smoky heat; nowadays it's more likely to be a 
sheet of galvanized zinc. The meats are "jerked," or 
turned, every 15 to 20 minutes. Pork takes two to 
four hours and chicken 45 minutes to two hours, de­
pending on the fire. The slower and longer the cook­
ing process, the better the finished jerk. 
To make jerk pork at home, I marinate the meat 
and refrigerate it overnight. I use a lot of jerk in pro­
portion to the amount of meat, normally two to three 
cups of jerk rub for a 6-pound pork butt roast. I prepare 
the pork butt by removing the bone (you can have the 
butcher do this) . Then I place it skin-side down on 
the cutting board and cut it at 1 Yz-inch intervals 
straight down to, but not through, the bottom layer of 
fat next to the skin. I rotate the roast 90° and again cut 
at 1 Yz-inch intervals. This makes a lot of stubby, square 
fingers of meat, all connected on one side by fat and 
skin. I rub the jerk deeply into these pieces of meat. 
About an hour before I begin cooking the roast, I 
start a fire in my covered grill with mesquite_ When 
the mesquite coals are ashen, I add peach or pecan 
wood (l do this because there's always more mes­
quite available than fruitwood) . I put a drip pan 
directly under the meat to prevent scorching. I often 
pour half a bottle ofJamaican Red Stripe beer into 
the drip pan (I drink the other half) . I set the pork on 
the grill rack 6 to 8 inches from the coals, cover it 
with a pot or lid, and "jerk" it every 15 to 20 minutes 
until the meat is tender, spicy, and succulent. By the 
time the pork is done, the pan's contents are a great 
dipping sauce. 
You can also cook jerk in the oven. See the turkey 
recipe at right. 
JERK RUB 
You'll get a better texture if you chop the herbs and pep­
pers by hand. A food processor or blender is a time-saver, 
but it tends to make an overly smooth puree. If you want 
to use a machine, be sure to pour in the half cup of oil first, 
and then add the herbs. The thyme and peppers should 
always be chopped by hand and added at the end. Be care­
ful with the peppers, however. Their oils can really burn 
your eyes and skin, so be sure to wash your hands when 
you're finished chopping. And don't add the seeds unless 
you like a lot of heat. 
If you grind the spices in a coffee mill or spice grinder, 
start with the nutmeg and cinnamon. Grind these until 
FINE COOKI G

--- Page 45 ---
coarse, then add the other spices, and grind them all to­
gether until fine. If you use preground spices, you might 
need to use more-up to double-depending on how long 
they've been sitting in your cupboard. 
Jerk rub is best after a few hours, when its flavors have 
had a chance to meld. The rub keeps for up to three 
months in the refrigerator. I tend to jerk everything in sight 
for a week and then have to make more. Makes 3 cups. 
30 scallions 
5-in. piece fresh ginger, peeled 
y" cup fresh garlic cloves, peeled 
6 bay leaves 
6 to 8 Scotch bonnet peppers, seeded, chopped fine by hand 
(substitute habaneras if necessary) 
2 tsp. freshly ground nutmeg, preferably Jamaican 
2 tsp. freshly ground cinnamon (about 1 stick) 
1 Tbs. freshly ground allspice, preferably Jamaican 
2 Tbs. black peppercorns, ground fresh 
2 Tbs. whole coriander seeds, ground fresh 
1 Tbs. sea or kosher salt 
1 cup fresh thyme leaves, chopped fine by hand 
OPTIONAL: 
j cup oil (only if using a blender) 
1 tsp. apricot jam or honey (only if using habaneros instead 
of Scotch bonnets) 
Chop the scallions, ginger, garlic, bay leaves, and peppers 
separately until moderately fine. Combine these ingredi­
ents and chop until fine. Put in a bowl and add the ground 
spices. Stir in the chopped thyme and mix well. 
JERKY TURKEY 
I usually jerk turkey over peachwood or applewood coals, 
but here's a method for the oven that's easy and tastes 
great. Brining the turkey for several hours flavors the meat 
a little, and helps the smoke and marinade flavors pene­
trate the meat during cooking. The roasting process mel­
lows the intense heat of the peppers, and renders the jerk 
pleasantly spicy and aromatic. The leftovers make delicious 
sandwiches or fantastic tacos. 
If there's any fat in the turkey breast cavity, you can 
chop it up and mix it with the jerk rub. Alternatively, 
you can use a few tablespoons of softened butter. The 
fat or butter will make the jerk even more succulent. 
Serves twelve. 
I I-lb. bone-in turkey breast 
1 j to 2 cups jerk rub (see recipe above) 
Salt and pepper 
FOR THE BRINE: 
1 cup dried hot chiles 
2 cups brown sugar 
1 cup sea or kosher salt 
4-in. piece fresh ginger, peeled and chopped 
2 Tbs. whole allspice 
j cup dried thyme 
3 gal. cold water 
Combine all the brine ingredients in a large, nonreactive 
container. Stir until the sugar and salt have dissolved. Sub­
merge the turkey breast in the brine, refrigerate it, and let it 
soak at least two but not much more than eight hours. 
Remove the turkey from the brine and carefully work 
your hand under the breast skin to separate it from the 
meat. Apply the jerk rub under the skin, massaging it 
evenly over the breast. Be sure you get it all the way to the 
other end of the breast. Set the turkey in a roasting pan 
and dust lightly with salt and pepper. Roast in a 350°F oven 
for about 3 hours. Baste every 30 min. or so with the pan 
drippings. When the turkey is firm to the touch, it's ready, 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
though you could check the internal temperature with a 
meat thermometer; it should register 1 65°F. let the turkey 
rest for about 1 0 min. before you cut the breast from the 
bone. I like to cut one breast side completely away from 
the bone, and then carve it crosswise, so every slice has a 
strip of criSp skin with a layer of jerk beneath. 
In 1983, lay B. McCarthy abandoned aerospace 
engineering for the kitchen. He is chef at Cascabel in 
San Antonio, Texas, where he practices a blend of 
Texan- andlamaican-flavored cooking. He's currently 
working on a 1 amaican cookbook that will be available 
from Crossing Press this year. • 
When the pork is cut 
into "fingers, " the 
jerk rub penetrates 
better. McCarthy 
bones a pork butt 
roast, makes deep cuts 
in two directions, and 
then spreads jerk rub 
all over it. Smoked 
over a fruitwood fire or 
roasted in the oven to 
a crackling crispness, 
it's Jamaican-style 
barbecue at home. 
McCarthy provides a 
pocket in the turkey 
for the jerk by care­
fully inserting his hand 
between the skin and 
meat. He then rubs 
the meat generously 
with the jerk, making 
sure it gets all the way 
to the other end of 
the breast. 
45

--- Page 46 ---
46 
BY ANNE STERLING 
lOften long for those snow-white, unripened 
cheeses displayed in cheesecloth bundles in the 
dairy shops of Paris, where I lived for many years. 
That's when I make my own yogurt cheese. It's sim­
ilar to the French fromage frais I'm homesick for, 
even though the authentic cheese doesn't start out 
as yogurt. Yogurt cheese is easy to make and it's ver­
satile (see the box above right) , delicious alone or 
mixed into other dishes. It has a creamy texture, 
even when made with nonfat yogurt, and because 
of that, it's been hailed as a "miracle" substitute for 
high-fat cream cheese, mayonnaise, and sour cream. 
JUST ADD YOGURT AND WAIT 
Making yogurt cheese couldn't be simpler: just 
spoon some yogurt into a filter and wait. The liquid 
whey drains out, leaving the thick and creamy milk 
solids and butterfat behind. By controlling the 
draining time, I can make the cheese light or dense 
and spreadable. 
The only difficult step in the process is choosing 
the yogurt, which can range from very tart to quite 
bland. Though the protein in the drained milk solids 
buffers the acid taste, the taste of the cheese will be 
similar to the taste of the undrained yogurt, so 
choose a yogurt that tastes good to you right out of 
the carton. Check the expiration date to get the 
freshest possible batch. 
Making your own yogurt can save money if you 
plan to make pounds of cheese. It may also be nec­
essary if you want a richer cheese made from whole 
milk. Many stores only carry low- and nonfat 
yogurts. Yogurt cheese made from whole milk will 
blend more smoothly in warm dishes and will stay 
creamy when toasted under the broiler. Nonfat 
yogurt cheese gets chewy and crumbly when broiled. 
There's only one rule to follow when choosing 
yogurt-don't use yogurt that contains gelatin, be­
cause gelatin inhibits the whey from draining. 
Pectin, which is found in some brands of yogurt, will 
not interfere with draining. 
PICK A FLAVOR 
Yogurt cheese is great just plain, but I like to add a 
little salt (about one teaspoon per quart of yogurt) , 
and often I'll add other savory ingredients. Some 
possibilities include fresh herbs, curry powder, 
minced garlic, or chopped black olives. Experiment 
by mixing the flavoring ingredient into a little 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 47 ---
What to do with your homemade cheese 
• Roll bite-sized balls in 
chopped nuts or chopped 
fresh herbs to eat as canapes 
• Arrange slices on rounds 
of French bread, broil, and 
serve with a salad or soup 
• Spread on crackers or bagels 
• Mix with honey and make 
"cream-filled" sandwich cookies 
• Marinate bite-sized balls 
in olive oil and rosemary to 
serve as a snack or on a salad 
• Mix with chutney to use 
as a dip or spread 
• Stir into guacamole 
• Pipe into hollowed-out 
vegetables for hors d'oeuvres 
• Mix with rice for stuffed 
grape leaves 
• Blend with pesto and toss 
with pasta-A.S. 
yogurt and do a taste test. Just remember the final 
product will be creamy and more mellow. 
I stir any flavorings into the yogurt before I put it 
in the filter to drain; this allows the flavors to ripen. 
Also, if I'm aiming for a firm cheese, it's easier to 
shape if the flavorings are added first. Stirring them 
in after draining could loosen the texture. 
THE SETUP 
To begin your cheesemaking, you need to assemble 
your draining equipment. A funnel lined with sev­
eral thicknesses of cheesecloth or an unbleached 
coffee filter is one option. I usually use my oid 
coffeemaker cone, lined with a filter. Recently, 
though, I bought a handy device made specifically 
for the purpose-The Really Creamy Yogurt 
Cheese Funnel-which drains two cups of yogurt, 
requires no paper filter or cheesecloth, and comes 
apart to store flat in a drawer. Set this funnel over a 
large measuring cup or a jar. 
Whether to drain the yogurt in or out of the 
refrigerator is up to you. In principle, the high acid 
level of the yogurt inhibits the growth of harmful 
bacteria at room temperature, but there's no way 
to judge how acid the yogurt really is (taste is not an 
indication) . The yogurt drains slightly faster at 
room temperature, and the taste seems slightly 
better. But for safety, it's a good idea to drain the 
cheese in the refrigerator. Place a saucer on top of 
the funnel or fit a plastic bag over the top to keep 
out refrigerator odors. 
THE RESULTS 
Yields will vary slightly between types of yogurt, 
different brands, and even from season to season. 
After an hour or two of draining, you should have 
a creamy consistency, much like sour cream. For 
a thick yogurt cheese that can be shaped and 
sliced, drain at least 8 and up to 24 hours. One 
quart of yogurt yields about 1 Yz cups of firm cheese 
and 2 Yz cups of whey. 
The whey is delicious and nutritious, so don't 
discard it. Do as the Lebanese do and add mint and 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
ice for a refreshing beverage, or use it in place of 
water to make rice. 
When the cheese has drained to the consistency 
you want, remove it from the filter. You can mold it 
into a log shape by rolling it up in plastic wrap or 
wax paper, or you can roll it between your palms into 
canape-size balls. Cover the cheese in plastic wrap 
and keep it refrigerated until you're ready to serve it. 
The cheese gets more tart with age, so plan to eat it 
within a week. 
Anne Sterling is a former director of La Varenne 
Cooking School in Paris. She now teaches food classes 
for adults and children in New Jersey . • 
The setup is simple. 
Sterling puts the 
yogurt in a coffee filter 
set in the cone from 
her coffeemaker. The 
whey drains from the 
yogurt, leaving a thick 
and creamy "cheese. " 
47

--- Page 48 ---
A Passion 
for Lobster 
How a Maine chef captures 
all the flavor from these 
expensive crustaceans 
BY SAM HAYWARD 
\ V {en Europeans first settled in coastal New 
W Ŋngland, lobsters were so plentiful that 
farmers plowed them into fields as fertilizer. There 
are accounts of lobsters crawling onto dry land to 
escape an overcrowded ocean floor. Indentured ser­
vants, contracting passage to America, set a limit to 
how many lobsters could be included in their diets. 
Things sure have changed. Once abundant, Maine 
lobsters are now a luxury. 
Even here on the coast, the price of lobster is 
high, so I take advantage of every flavor-bearing part 
of them. On top of the rich tail and claw meat, I use 
the liquids released during shelling, the vegetable-, 
wine-, and lobster-flavored court bouillon in which 
the lobster was poached, and even the shells. I'm 
also fond of the soft, olive-green tomalley found in 
the body cavity, and the bright-red roe in the tail 
and body of many female lobsters. I use all of these to 
strengthen the delicate lobster flavor in dishes such 
as Lobster Cakes with Basil and Lobster Coulis or, 
my family's favorite, Lobster Chowder (recipes on 
pp. 52-53) . 
The Maine lobster, as Homarus americanus is pop­
ularly called, is fished commercially from Long Island 
Sound to Newfoundland. The only lobster similar to 
it is the Brittany lobster, found on the European 
shores of the Atlantic and North Sea. Other so­
called lobsters exist all around the globe, though 
these are clawless and inferior impostors, as any 
Mainer can tell you. The langouste of France, the 
spiny or rock lobster of the tropical Atlantic, and the 
Nothing beats a Maine lobster. Lobster's sweet, tender, and deli· 
cately flavored meat is irresistible simply cooked and dipped in but­
ter, -as a topping for pasta, or made into chowder or lobster cakes. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 49 ---
slipper of Southeast Asia have more of a shrimplike 
flavor, and the only edible part of them is their tail. 
Maine lobsters have a sweeter, more delicate 
flavor and a more tender texture than these clawless 
lobsters, and they yield additional meat from the 
claws, knuckles, and legs. As a bonus to cooks, 
Maine lobsters are available live and whole, which 
means that more flavor and food is available in the 
juices and shells that come with them. 
HOW TO CHOOSE THEM 
When buying Maine lobsters, make sure that they're 
alive. A healthy "bug" will arch its back and raise its 
claws menacingly, while both a sleepy lobster and a 
dead lobster will have droop-
ing claws and tail. I always 
check to see if the mouth 
parts are moving because the 
gills located there will be 
faintly waving for oxygen if 
the lobster has any life left in 
him. While a recently expired 
lobster may still be fine to eat, 
a long-dead lobster can con­
tain toxic amounts of danger-
0us bacteria. The dead lob­
ster's own digestive enzymes 
will decompose the flesh, 
making the meat mushy and 
tasteless and tainting the 
wonderful juices from the 
body cavity. 
Lobsters won't live long 
out of the water, so it's best to 
buy and cook them the same 
day. Keep lobsters in the re-
Female 
Male 
frigerator in a paper bag until you're ready to put 
them in the pot. 
Size-Years ago a premium was placed on really 
big lobsters of ten pounds or more. These are now 
rare, and it's illegal to take them in Maine waters. For 
all their showiness, the meat on these monsters is gen­
erally tough and lacks the delicate sweetness I prefer. 
I've found that the smaller the lobster, the denser and 
smoother the fibers in its meat. The smallest lobsters 
legally taken in Maine, called chickens, weigh be­
tween sixteen and twenty ounces. A good hard-shell 
lobster of this weight with two claws will yield about 
five ounces of meat to an experienced picker. In my 
opinion, three one-pound lobsters will taste better-
JUNE/JULY 1994 
and represent a better value-than one three­
pounder that will cost the diner a small fortune. 
Females-Cooks prize female lobsters for their 
unripened eggs, called roe or coral (see the sidebar 
on p. 51). Delicately flavored, these blackish-green 
eggs turn bright red when cooked. There are two 
ways to distinguish a female from a male. First, the 
female's tail is broad and flat; the edges are slightly 
splayed out. The edges of the male's tail curve 
around as if they want to connect in a complete cir­
cle (see the illustration below). Second, the tiny first 
pair of swimmerets on the underside of the tail on 
the female are delicate and thin, while the swim­
merets on males are thick. 
Cross-sectional view 
tells sex of lobster. The 
tail of the female lob­
ster is broader and 
more splayed out than 
the almost round tail of 
the male. Chances are 
that a female will have 
unripened eggs, called 
roe, in her body. 
Shedders-Lobsters must 
shed their external skeletons 
in order to grow. The molt oc­
curs during the summer 
months, triggered by changes 
in water temperature. New­
shell lobsters, or shedders, 
have soft, papery shells that 
peel easily. Since vulnerable 
shedders tend to hide rather 
than graze, they have less 
meat than hard-shell lobsters 
of the same size. But the meat 
of shedders is exceptionally 
sweet and tender, and I prefer 
their flavor, though that's 
hardly a universal opinion 
here in Maine. 
Where they're from­
Most lobsters caught in the 
Gulf of Maine come from 
traps set within ten miles of 
the coast. It seems strange to think of lobsters as 
farmed, but that's very nearly the case. It takes 
roughly seven years for a lobster to grow to legal size, 
which is also the age that females start to reproduce. 
Lobstermen are actually feeding the general lobster 
population because they haul the traps (baited with 
salted fish) every day or so and throw back the im­
mature lobsters. 
Lobsters taken offshore from deeper, cleaner, and 
colder waters have all the sweetness of any healthy 
lobster, but they also have a gentle smack of iodine. 
The tomalley from these bugs is salty and fishy in a 
thoroughly delightful way, and it flavors soups and 
sauces with clean lobster essence. I've tasted excep-
49

--- Page 50 ---
Remove the bands to 
keep the flavor pure. 
The rubber bands that 
lobstermen put on the 
lobsters' claws can 
taint the cooking liq. 
uid and should be re­
moved before cooking. 
Hayward holds the 
lobster securely by its 
body, slips a knife 
underneath the band 
and, pushing the band 
away from himself, 
snaps it off. 
This lobster isn't 
done. Tug on a feeler 
to test for doneness. 
When the lobster is 
fully cooked, the feeler 
comes off easily. If the 
tougher connective tis­
sue holding the feeler 
is cooked enough to 
separate, the meat 
inside is cooked, too. 
50 
tional lobsters from around the Isles of Shoals in 
southern Maine, and from Monhegan Island and 
other offshore locales near the broad mouth of 
Penobscot Bay. All different, all wonderful. 
Unfortunately, the tomalley in some lobsters 
caught off the Maine Coast has been found to con­
tain dioxin and other carcinogenic chemical 
residue. The Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection and two other state agencies recommend 
that lobster eaters limit their consumption of tomal­
ley, and that women in their child-bearing years re­
frain altogether. No dioxins or other harmful com­
pounds have been found in the lobster meat itsel£ 
COOKING LOBSTERS 
There are many ways to cook lobster. For centuries 
along the Maine shore, lobsters have been piled in 
hot, stone-lined pits with sweet corn, potatoes, and 
clams and steamed in the oceanic vapor con­
tributed by seaweed. On restaurant menus you'll 
see them boiled, baked-stuffed, poached, broiled, 
and grilled. I've even heard of microwaving them 
inside an oiled paper bag. While all these methods 
work, the three I prefer are steaming, poaching, 
and grilling. 
Simply steamed-Steaming lobsters is the sim­
plest method and better than boiling because you 
don't have to wait for gallons of water to come to a 
boil, and little of the lobster's flavor leaches out. 
You'll need a pot large enough to easily contain all 
the lobsters you plan to cook, and it should have a 
tight-fitting lid. Add just one inch of water to the 
pot and bring it to a rapid boil. If you're near the 
ocean, try using sea water or adding some fresh sea­
weed to the pot. 
Before adding the lobsters, rinse them briefly un­
der cool running water and remove the elastic bands 
from their claws (see photo at left) . The rubber can 
impart a slight aroma to the cooked lobsters. Put the 
lobsters in the pot on their backs. This quickens 
cooking a little, and the lobsters expire faster. 
Quickly cover the pot and turn up the heat to bring 
the water back to a boil. 
Cook 1- to 1 Yz-pound lobsters for seven minutes 
over high heat, timing from the moment the water 
returns to a boil. After seven minutes, turn off the 
heat and let the lobsters rest in the covered pot for a 
minute. If the lobsters are stacked more than three 
or four layers deep in the pot, cook the lobsters in 
the steam for ten to twelve minutes. Remove the 
lobsters from the pot with tongs and serve immedi­
ately. Larger lobsters will also require more time over 
boiling water. Two-pound lobsters need about ten 
minutes to cook through. To check if a lobster is 
done, take hold of one of the long feeler antennae, 
and give a slight pull. If it separates easily, the lobster 
is sufficiently cooked (see photo at far left) . 
Poaching in flavor-I like to poach lobsters be­
cause the gentle cooking produces meat that's both 
denser and tenderer than steamed meat. When 
poached in a court bouillon-a liquid flavored with 
herbs, vegetables, wine, and other savory ingredi­
ents-the lobsters absorb some of the flavor and 
aroma from the liquid. (Recipe on p. 52.) 
Rinse the lobsters briefly under cool running wa­
ter, remove the elastic bands, and put the lobsters in 
the boiling bouillon. If necessary, add water to com­
pletely cover the lobsters. Keep the flame high until 
the bouillon returns to a simmer, and then reduce 
the heat. A bare simmer is sufficient: at the perfect 
temperature, the bouillon will just tremble, not bub­
ble. Poach the lobsters for twelve minutes, regulat­
ing the heat carefully. Turn off the burner, and allow 
the lobsters to repose in the bouillon for an addi­
tional two minutes. Remove the lobsters and cool 
them slightly before shelling. 
To strengthen the bouillon, put the lobster shells 
back into the bouillon, return to a simmer, and cook 
fifteen minutes. Strain and reserve. 
Grilling-I love the gentle smokiness that grilling 
gives to lobsters. Before grilling, partially poach or 
steam them for about five minutes, and then cool 
and shell them. Cut the meat into large pieces and 
marinate it briefly. I suggest a brightly flavored herb 
butter, or a freshly made pes to lightened with addi­
tional extra-virgin olive oil, or a marinade of rice­
wine vinegar, slivered garlic, peanut oil, soy, and 
cilantro leaves. Lightly rub the outside of the shells 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 51 ---
with a little vegetable oil to 
keep them from becoming 
brittle or scorched, and pile 
the meat back inside. Rake 
the fire in the grill to one side, 
place the upturned, filled lob­
ster bodies on the far side of 
the grill, and put the cover on 
the grill. The lobsters are 
done as soon as the heat has 
penetrated to the center of 
the meat. Test by inserting a 
thin knife into the meat and 
touching the side of the blade 
to your lip or tongue. It 
should feel hot. 
SHElLING LOBSTERS 
For purists, the only way to 
enjoy a lobster is to pick the 
meat from its shell after 
steaming or boiling and to dip 
it, morsel by morsel, into 
warm clarified butter. Not be­
ing a purist, I like to pick the 
entire lobster (or better, two) 
and put the meat directly into 
a bowl with a little butter, the 
tomalley, and the coral. The 
flavors intensify each other, 
and nothing is lost or wasted. 
With a little experience, 
shelling lobsters becomes 
quick and efficient. If you're shelling lobster at the 
table, arm yourself with a lobster cracker and a cock­
tail fork. If you're shelling lobster in the kitchen, set 
a strainer over a bowl to collect all the liquid and 
the tomalley and roe that flow from the shells. 
Major breaks-First break the lobster into man­
ageable pieces. Twist the tail off the body and break 
off the tail fins by bending them backward. Break 
off the claws at the body, and pull the body shell off 
the white body frame (see photo on p. 52) . 
Tomalley-Look into the body shell for the 
tomalley. Actually the hepatopancreas, an organ 
that combines some functions of both liver and pan­
creas, the tomalley bursts and liquefies when 
cooked. Tourists can be seen in any lobster house on 
the coast of Maine squeamishly confronting tomal­
ley for the first time. But those who really appreciate 
lobsters know that this olive-green pate is one of the 
most delectable parts of a lobster. Since I found out 
that the tomalley may contain minute amounts of 
dioxin, I stopped including the tomalley in dishes 
that I serve to the public, but I can't resist eating it 
myself every once in a while. 
Tail-When it's cool enough to handle, place the 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Delicate roe 
Female lobsters often have unripened eggs, 
called roe or coral, in their body cavities and 
tapering down into their tails. When raw (see 
top photo at left) , the roe is a dark greenish­
black color. When cooked, the eggs tum bright 
red (see bottom photo at left) . 
You can take advantage of the delicate lobster 
flavor of the roe in a variety of ways. Whisk raw 
roe with cream and add it to a soup or sauce. 
Whirl it with four times its volume of unsalted 
butter in a food processor to make a green lob­
ster roe butter, which, when whisked into a sim­
mering mixture of wine and bouillon, changes 
instantly into an orange-pink roe butter sauce. 
I have painted dinner plates with green roe 
butter, and slid one side of the plate under a 
broiler, turning that side of the plate pink and 
leaving the cooler side pale green. 
Bright-red cooked roe has a grainy, waxy 
texture that looks and tastes lovely sprinkled 
delicately over chowders, soups, and warm or 
chilled lobster dishes. To separate the eggs, first 
crumble the cooked, cooled roe with a fork onto 
a baking sheet, and dry it in a moderate oven. 
Then rub the roe through a wire strainer to pro­
duce tiny red grains.-S.H. 
curve of the tail in the curled palm of your hand, 
nestling the back of the shell between the heel of 
your hand and your fingers. Squeeze as if to make a 
fist. The membrane on the bottom of the shell will 
split. Now grasp the tail in both hands, and spread 
the tail shell outward and away from you, exposing 
the tail meat. Remove it in one piece. 
Remove the intestinal tract by peeling back the 
thin, red strip of meat along the back of the tail, ex­
posing the blackish intestine. Pull the intestine out 
intact, or rinse it out with a little water or bouillon. 
(I seldom bother to remove the digestive tract for 
myself, but generally do for other diners.) 
Female lobsters may have roe inside the tail meat. 
The roe will be bright red if the lobster is cooked, and 
greenish-black if it is mostly raw. (For suggestions on 
what to do with the roe, see the sidebar above.) 
Legs-Twist the eight small legs off the white 
body frame. If you're eating the lobster, suck the 
meat out of these as if pulling on a drinking straw, 
and by progressively squeezing the leg meat out 
with your front teeth. Somewhere along the line I 
learned another neat trick for getting the meat out 
of the small legs. After twisting the legs off the body 
51

--- Page 52 ---
52 
The shells have 
flavor, too. Expose 
all flavor-bearing 
parts of the lobster 
by pulling the white 
body frame from the 
red outer shell 
(above). The shells 
simmer with toma­
toes, aromatic vege­
tables, and brandy to 
infuse lobster flavor 
into the Lobster Coulis 
(left). See the recipe 
for this delicious, ver­
satile sauce at right. 
frame, put them on a cutting board or the counter. 
Beginning at the pincer end of each leg, roll a stur­
dy wine bottle or a rolling pin over the leg, and the 
meat will squeeze out like toothpaste. I often float 
these beautiful strands of red lobster meat on the 
surface oflobster soups. 
Claws-Twist the knuckles off the claws. Use a 
lobster cracker to crack across the claw at the point 
where the "thumb" is connected. Twist off the thumb 
by bending it straight backward. The thumb should 
leave its thin strand of meat behind, and will probably 
bring with it an oval of inedible cartilage. Now re­
move the claw meat in one piece. This is awesomely 
delicious meat. Pick up the knuckles and either push 
the meat through the cylindrical shells with your lit­
tle finger or crack them open with a lobster cracker. 
Body-Next spread open the white body frame, 
and notice the small cartilage chambers along the 
inside of each half Each of these chambers harbors 
a tiny morsel of pure white meat, worth the trouble 
of extraction to real aficionados. Use a toothpick or 
cocktail fork for the task. 
Liquids and shells-At this point, though you've 
removed all the meat, the roe, and the tomalley, the 
lobster still has more flavor to give. If you poached 
the lobster, the court bouillon is gently flavored with 
lobster and can be used in sauces or soups. The 
shells can be simmered with court bouillon to give it 
a more concentrated flavor, and they can also be 
used to make a great lobster coulis-a thin tomato 
puree (see the recipe at right) . The liquids released 
from the body cavity during shelling can be used to 
strengthen the lobster flavor of almost any dish. 
A final use for shells-Remember the story 
about lobster being plentiful enough to plow into 
fields as fertilizer? Now that we have come full circle, 
getting full use from just about everything the lob­
ster can yield, the lobster achieves its final destiny in 
the compost pile. If you don't have a problem with 
raccoons or neighborhood dogs, this is a great way to 
activate a sleepy compost pile. The temperature of 
mine soars almost instantly when it gets a dose of 
lobster shells. 
LOBSTER COURT BOUILLON 
Enough to poach four lobsters at a time. 
4 cloves garlic, chopped coarse 
1 cup sliced celery ribs 
1 cup sliced carrot 
1 medium leek (white and green parts), split, washed, and 
chopped coarse 
1 cup sliced white or yellow onion 
1 large sprig of parsley 
6 bay leaves 
1 0 to 12 branches thyme 
1 branch rosemary 
24 peppercorns, lightly cracked 
2 Tbs. white-wine vinegar 
4 cups dry white wine 
8 cups of water 
Put all the ingredients in a large pot, bring to a boil, and 
simmer for 5 min. For tips on poaching lobsters, see p. 50. 
LOBSTER CAKES WITH BASIL 
AND LOBSTER COULIS 
These delicate lobster cakes look and taste wonderful 
served with fresh basil on a pool of lobster coulis. If you 
don't have time to make the coulis, serve the lobster cakes 
with mustard and fresh tarragon, or with a soft, homemade 
mayonnaise mixed with capers and parsley or chives. Serves 
four as a main course, up to twelve as an appetizer. 
THE LOBSTER CAKES: 
4 live lobsters, 1 to 1 j lb. each 
1 medium shallot, minced fine 
1 egg white 
j tsp. salt (preferably sea salt) 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 53 ---
Cayenne pepper 
2 Tbs. Armagnac or other brandy 
Y., cup heavy cream 
\.2 cup basil leaves sliced in thin chi(fonade, plus whole 
perfect leaves for decoration 
2 Tbs. clarified unsalted butter 
Have ready a bath of ice and water in a sink or large con­
tainer. Kill the lobsters by immersing them in a pot of 
rapidly boiling water for 2 min. Submerge them in the ice 
water and chill completely. 
Shell the lobster tails, claws, and knuckles. Force the 
meat from the lobster legs by rolling a wine bottle or 
rolling pin over them. Reserve the bodies and shells. Put 
the tail meat of two of the lobsters into the work bowl of 
a food processor with the shallot, egg white, salt, and a 
pinch of cayenne. Process until very smooth. Add the 
Armagnac. While processing, add the cream in a steady 
stream, pausing occasionally to scrape down the work 
bowl. Dice the remaining tail, claw, and knuckle meat into 
%-in. pieces. In a large bowl, gently combine the diced 
lobster and the lobster mousse. Chill at least an hour while 
you proceed with the lobster coulis (see below). 
' 
Reheat the finished lobster coulis. Add the sliced basil to 
the coulis. 
Brush a nonstick skillet with a thin film of the butter and 
spoon the lobster mixture into the pan to make twelve cakes. 
(Do this in batches, if necessary.) Brown on both sides over 
high heat. Reduce the heat and continue cooking 4 min., or 
until the cakes resist a gentle press. At the last minute, add the 
lobster leg meat to the pan to warm. Divide the cakes among 
serving plates lined with lobster coulis. Arrange the leg meat 
over the cakes. Decorate with whole basil leaves. 
THE LOBSTER (OUlIS: 
The body shells and white body frames of two lobsters 
Y., cup olive oil 
4 cloves garlic, chopped coarse 
1 medium leek (white part only), split, washed, and chopped 
\.2 cup sliced carrot 
Y., cup chopped celery ribs 
1 Tbs. fresh tarragon leaves 
2 Tbs. chopped flat-leaf parsley leaves 
1 tsp. chopped fresh thyme leaves 
2 bay leaves 
\.2 cup Armagnac or other brandy 
1 cup dry white wine 
2 lb. fresh plum tomatoes, peeled, seeded, and diced 
Salt (preferably sea salt) and cayenne pepper 
For easy removal later, keep the shells of the lobster in large 
pieces, but separate the white body frames from the outer 
shells. Put the shells, the body frames, and the oil in a large, 
nonreactive pot or Dutch oven. Saute 5 min. over medium 
heat, stirring frequently to avoid scorching. Add the garlic, 
vegetables (except the tomatoes), and herbs. Continue 
cooking until the carrots are tender, about 1 0 min. Add the 
Armagnac and wine. Simmer to reduce by half. Add the 
diced tomatoes and simmer 1 0 min. Remove the lobster 
shells and bodies with tongs or a slotted spoon, and con­
tinue to reduce the sauce until slightly thickened, about 
1 0 min., over medium heat. (Tomatoes with high water 
content will require longer reduction time.) Cool slightly. 
Puree in a blender or food processor. Season with salt and 
a pinch of cayenne. 
LOBSTER CHOWDER 
I like to add interesting seafood along with the lobster to 
my chowder, such as steamed mussels, razor clams, tiny 
Maine shrimp, great Pemaquid oysters, or even a little sea­
urchin roe. Makes 72 cups. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
4 to 6 lobsters, 1 lb. each 
Lobster Court Bouillon (see recipe at left) 
4 oz. smoky slab bacon, cut into Y.,-in. dice 
2 medium leeks (white parts only), split, washed and cut 
into \.2-in. dice 
2 lb. russet potatoes, peeled and cut into \.2-in. dice 
1 cup dry white wine 
2 cups cream 
4 ears fresh sweet corn, scraped (about 2\.2 cups) 
Salt (preferably sea salt) and freshly milled black pepper 
Poach the lobsters in court bouillon, following the tech­
nique on p. 50. Cool and shell the lobsters, reserving the 
liquid released during shelling, as well as 2 cups of the 
court bouillon. 
Fry the bacon in a soup pot without scorching. Pour off 
all but 2 Tbs. of the fat. Add the leeks and potatoes, and stir 
to coat with the bacon fat. Cook over medium heat for 
5 min., stirring frequently, until the leeks are soft. Add the 
reserved court bouillon and the wine, bring to a boil, and 
simmer until the potatoes are nearly tender. Add the cream, 
bring to a boil, and reduce to a simmer. With a sturdy wire 
whisk or a potato masher, mash about half the potatoes into 
the liquid to thicken the chowder. Add the scraped sweet 
corn. Simmer 4 or 5 min., stirring to prevent sticking. 
Cut the lobster tail meat into large dice, leaving the 
knuckles and claws whole. Add the lobster rneat and 
V2 cup of the reserved juices to the chowder. I like to heat 
the lobster meat and juice in a skillet before adding them to 
the chowder so that proteins in the lobster don't make the 
chowder curdle. Add salt and pepper to taste. 
Sam Hayward is the executive chef at the Harraseeket 
Inn in Freeport, Maine. He calculates that in twenty 
years of cooking professionally on the coast of Maine, 
he has overseen the preparation of more than a 
hundred thousand lobsters. • 
No starchy binder 
holds these lobster 
cakes together, just a 
mousse of raw lobster 
meat. Served with 
fresh basil and lobster 
coulis, the delicate 
cakes work equally 
well as an appetizer or 
as a main course. 
53

--- Page 54 ---
Juicy roast pork loin is 
studded with colorful 
vegetables. Roasted 
tomato sauce and 
pureed potatoes with 
shallots are terrific 
accompaniments. 
Searing improves 
flavor and keeps 
juices in. Before roast­
ing, all sides of the 
roast should be evenly 
browned in a hot 
skillet with a little oil. 
54 
Beyond Plain Pork 
Butterflying and stuffing with summer vegetables adds 
moistness, flavor, and eye .. appeal to a boneless roast 
BY HARTMUT HANDKE 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 55 ---
STUFFED BONELESS PORK LOIN 
Serves six to eight. 
2 to 21jz-pound boneless pork loin 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Fresh rosemary and thyme, chopped 
Oil 
FOR THE STUFFING: 
1 pound mixed trimmed and cut vegetables (about 5 cups) 
Choose from: 
Small mushrooms, in quarters 
Red, yellow, and green peppers, in medium julienne 
Yellow squash, in half-rounds 
Zucchini, in half-rounds 
Carrots, in thin slices 
Eggplant, in peeled half-rounds 
Scallions, in 2-inch lengths 
1 tablespoon chopped shallot 
1 teaspoon chopped garlic 
2 tablespoons chopped mixed fresh herbs-­
parsley, thyme, rosemary, and oregano 
Salt and pepper 
l4 cup olive oil 
These vegetables are ready for the stuffing. They've been seared for color and flavor, and 
then roasted until tender and fully cooked. 
Rolling the stuffing in plastic makes it easy to shape. One end of the roll is tied securely, 
and then the other end is twisted until the stuffing is compressed into a perfect cylinder. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
\ V Íen deciding whether I'm going to add a 
W ŉtuffing to a cut of meat, I ask myself, 
"Will a stuffing improve the flavor, the look, 
and-in my case as a restaurant chef-the sales 
value of the meat!" For boneless pork roast, the 
answer to those questions is "yes" all around. A 
stuffing adds moisture and flavor to the pork, 
which can be dry and bland on its own. Adding a 
stuffing transforms a plain piece of meat into a dish 
that is enticing to my customers and will be to your 
friends and family, too. 
My stuffing is made with pan-seared vegetables 
loaded with fresh herbs and olive oil, so it's very 
moist, and colorful, too. To open and stuff the roast 
easily and efficiently, first I butterfly it and open it up 
like a book. I season the meat on the inside, add the 
stuffing, and then truss and roast the pork loin. 
When I carve the finished roast, I have perfectly 
shaped slices, with a beautiful mosaic of vibrant veg­
etables surrounded by an even band of meat. 
MY STUFFING MAKES ROASTING 
THE PORK EASY 
A big advantage of my stuffing is that it's com­
pletely cooked before it goes into the roast; this al­
lows me to concentrate on cooking the roast to 
perfection, without worrying about whether the 
stuffing is correctly cooked at the same time. With 
old-style forcemeat or mousse stuffings (which 
contain raw meat, eggs, and cream) , the cooking 
might be compromised-the roast a little overdone 
in order to adequately cook the stuffing. Here, I 
can cook the roast so the meat is pale pink and 
juicy. The fact that the vegetables are completely 
cooked also means that they won't change shape 
or give off juices during cooking, which could make 
the stuffing shrink or slide. 
The ingredients. I use a variety of summery 
vegetables in the stuffing: eggplant, bell peppers, 
scallions, zucchini, yellow squash, carrots, and 
mushrooms (see ingredient list at left) . I want to 
have 4 to 5 cups of chopped vegetables for a raw 
2-pound roast. Along with the vegetables, I add 
about a tablespoon of chopped shallot, a teaspoon 
of chopped garlic, and 2 tablespoons of chopped 
mixed fresh herbs, like parsley, thyme, oregano, 
and rosemary. Almost any combination of vege­
tables and herbs will work, though I stay away 
from very wet vegetables, such as tomatoes, and 
from flavors that are very strong and don't pair 
easily, such as asparagus. 
I cut the vegetables in varying sizes so that they'll 
all cook at the same rate. I leave the eggplant pretty 
chunky because it collapses a lot during cooking, 
while I cut carrots small because they're dense and 
slow-cooking. The overall size of the cuts, however, 
is pretty large. If! cut the vegetables into small dice, 
55

--- Page 56 ---
The right way to butterfly. The knife is level and the chef's hand is stretched flat, ready to 
sense any deviation in the cut. 
The butterflied pork is opened like a book. Any uneven spots can be pounded out to give a 
perfect expanse of meat, ready to season and stuff. 
56 
they would look great raw, but once cooked, the 
colors and shapes would blur together. 
The cooking method. I mix all the vegetables, 
shallot, garlic, herbs, and salt and pepper together 
with about 3 tablespoons of olive oil and leave them 
to marinate about 30 minutes at room temperature. 
I cook the stuffing in two steps-first, pan-searing 
on top of the stove and, second, finishing in the 
oven. To pan-sear, I heat another tablespoon of olive 
oil in a very hot skillet. I add the vegetables and cook 
them over high heat for 2 to 3 minutes, stirring or 
shaking the pan constantly so they don't burn. This 
method caramelizes the vegetables, giving them a 
nice color and, more importantly, developing a 
deeper flavor. Next, I spread out the sauteed vege­
tables on a sheet pan and finish cooking them in a 
hot oven, about 400°F, for another 5 to 10 minutes, 
just until they're tender. To keep things simple at 
home, you could finish cooking them in the frying 
pan on top of the stove if you pay careful attention. 
Use low heat, and if the vegetables seem to be 
browning too much or drying out, add a little water 
or stock. Certain vegetables, such as carrots and 
onions, have a lot of sugar in them and can burn eas­
ily. To avoid this, you could cut these sugary ingre­
dients thinner and add them last. 
Shaping the stuffing. After I cook the stuffing, I 
let it cool, and then wrap it up in plastic wrap to form 
a cylinder, which I then freeze. This method gives 
me stuffing in a solid shape, which is very easy to 
handle when filling and trussing the meat because 
the stuffing stays securely in the center of the roast, 
and bits of vegetables don't fall out of the ends. It 
also means that I can prepare my stuffing way ahead 
of time, and in large quantities, so it's ready to pull 
out of the freezer whenever needed. This method is 
standard efficiency for a professional kitchen, but it 
would also be a help when entertaining or even 
when cooking this roast for a midweek meal. 
To make the cylinder, which should be about 
1 Yz inches in diameter, I lay a double thickness of 
plastic wrap on the counter. I spoon the cooled 
stuffing down the center in a line about as long as 
my pork loin, and then fold over one side of the 
plastic and shape the stuffing into a loose log. I roll 
the log completely in the plastic wrap, and then I 
twist one end to close, tying with a piece of string to 
secure it. I twist the other end until the whole log 
gets nice and tight (see the photo on p. 55) and tie 
that end tightly. 
BUTTERflY TO OPEN, TRUSS TO ClOSE 
To butterfly the roast, first I trim off the fat. Person­
ally, I like fat on pork, but we're going a little leaner 
at the restaurant in response to customer requests, 
so I trim the pork completely. You can leave as much 
or as little fat as you like; the rest of the preparation 
and cooking is the same, whether the meat is 
trimmed or not. 
The boneless pork loin is shaped like a slightly 
flattened cylinder. To butterfly it, I make one straight 
cut along one long edge, cutting almost through to 
the other long side. My goal is to get the piece of 
pork so it's all one thickness. I just gauge the thick­
ness of the meat, divide that measurement by two, 
and stop my cut that distance from the edge of the 
meat. For example, if the pork is 2 inches thick, 
when I cut through the middle, I'll create two sides 
that are each an inch thick. Therefore, I'll bring the 
knife through the meat to within an inch of the back 
side. When I open out the butterflied meat, the 
whole piece will be an inch thick. 
This cutting technique is pretty easy. I make sure 
that the whole edge of the knife blade is in contact 
with the meat (as shown in the top photo at left) , so 
that I can check that I'm starting out straight. I 
apply a little pressure on the top of the meat with 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 57 ---
Frozen solid and easy to use. The frozen stuffing stays put, so the meat can be neatly 
wrapped around it. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
my stretched-out hand to secure the meat and to 
help me keep the cut level. I try not to saw back and 
forth too much, but rather to make one continuous 
pulling stroke toward me. Of course, I use a very 
sharp knife to do this right. 
When I've cut far enough, I open up the meat 
like a book (see the bottom photo at left) and lay it 
flat. If I see any uneven spots, I put the meat be­
tween two pieces of plastic wrap and gently pound 
them out. 
Adding the vegetable stuffing. When the meat 
is uniformly thick, I season it with some salt and 
pepper, unwrap the frozen stuffing, and place it in 
the center of the meat. I wrap the meat around the 
stuffing (as shown in the photo above) and butt the 
two long edges together in a neat seam, which nei­
ther overlaps nor gaps. I actually do want to have a 
little extra meat at this seam for slack, however, 
because as the roast cooks, the meat will shrink 
slightly. By just pushing and easing some more meat 
at the seam edge, I'm giving enough allowance for 
shrinkage so that when the roast is cooked, the 
meat will form a perfectly flush seam and the fin­
ished slice will look great. 
With this kind of stuffing, I don't need to worry 
about closing up the ends of the roast. Because it's 
frozen, it won't fall out during trussing and searing. 
Now I truss the meat in order to keep the stuffing 
securely in the center of the roast, and also to help 
the roast keep a nice straight shape during cooking. 
For detailed instructions on trussing, see Basics. 
A TWO-STEP ROASTING METHOD 
To give the meat a little more flavor, I like to roll it 
in some more chopped herbs and, of course, season 
it with salt and pepper. Rosemary and thyme are 
nice because they have strong flavors and are 
tough herbs. Herbs like parsley are too fragile and 
delicately flavored to withstand the searing and 
roasting process. 
The initial searing. Any meat should be seared 
on top of the stove before it goes in the oven. Sear­
ing does two things-it closes the pores of the meat 
so that all the juice doesn't run out during roasting, 
and it caramelizes the outside of the meat, giving it 
a nice color and flavor. Some recipes will tell you to 
sear the roast by placing it in a very hot oven for the 
first few minutes, then turning the oven heat 
down, but I don't believe that this method is effec­
tive-you won't get true caramelization of the 
meat juices. 
To sear the pork, I heat a little more oil in a skil­
let, add the roast, and cook over medium-high 
heat until browned, turning it so all sides are 
evenly colored. I'm not trying to cook the pork 
here, I'm just coloring the outside layer of meat. 
Searing done, I transfer the meat to a rack in a 
roasting pan and leave it in the refrigerator until 
I'm ready to roast. I always like to roast meat and 
poultry on a rack, not directly on the roasting pan, 
so the heat can circulate freely around the roast. 
Also, I avoid getting an overcooked crusty area 
where the meat touches the pan. 
Roasting and serving. I roast the pork in a 375°F 
oven for 15 to 20 minutes to the pound. When the 
pork is cooked, the internal temperature should read 
around 150° on a meat thermometer for pink, juicy 
meat. The temperature will increase slightly once 
the roast is out of the oven, so you can remove the 
roast when the thermometer reads about 1 45°. 
I make sure to embed the thermometer in the meat 
and not in the stuffing. 
I always let any roasted meat or poultry rest out of 
the oven, but in a warm place, for about 15 minutes 
before carving and serving. This lets the juices re­
distribute throughout the flesh, making the meat 
tenderer and juicier. 
At my restaurant, I like to serve this pork roast 
with a roasted tomato sauce, but for serving at a fam­
ily meal, the roast really doesn't need pairing with a 
sauce. The substantial vegetable stuffing supplies 
plenty of flavor and color. I like to serve this with a 
bottle of Cotes du Rhone. The big flavors of the wine 
work great with the Mediterranean feel of the vege­
table and herb stuffing. 
Hartmut Handke is one of the 50 chefs certified as 
a Master Chef (CMC) by the American Culinary 
Federation, and he has won dozens of medals in 
worldwide culinary competitions. He was Executive 
Chef at The Greenbrier, a five-star resort in West 
Virginia, and in 1 991 he moved to Columbus, Ohio, 
to open his own restaurant, Handke's Cuisine . • 
57

--- Page 58 ---
58 
Savoring Some 
Sweets of the Vine 
As an aperitif or after4dinner treat, these sweet 
muscat wines make a good meal great 
BY ROBERT FEINN 
Ìe difference between a very good dinner and a 
1 ËeallY great one can hinge on a small glass. 
A pour of sweet wine before, during, or after dessert is 
a touch, all too often overlooked, that can extend the 
camaraderie and enhance the pleasure of a dinner 
party. The sweet wines produced from varieties of the 
muscat grape are an especially welcome addition to a 
meal. But you needn't wait for dessert to enjoy these 
delicious muscat wines. They are appropriate as aper­
itifs and to accompany first courses, and they're al­
together proper served as a midaftemoon refresher. 
Muscat wines are produced in many countries, in­
cluding France, Italy, Spain, Greece, Hungary, and the 
United States, where varied growing conditions, grape 
varieties, and vinification methods make for many dis­
tinctive styles of wine. I've selected just two of these 
wines to discuss--one French and one Italian-be­
cause the dramatic contrast in their styles shows how 
interesting and varied muscat wines can be. But before 
talking about these two kinds of muscat, a quick dis­
cussion about sweet wines in general will be useful. 
WHAT MAKES SWEET WINES SWEET 
Sweet wines are sweet for a several reasons. The 
grapes that are used to make them have a high sugar 
content to begin with. Then, those grapes are har­
vested when their sugar levels are at their peak; for 
the wines described here, that's late in the season. Af­
ter harvesting, the grapes are pressed to extract their 
juice, which is then put into refrigerated stainless­
steel fermentation tanks. Cold fermentation in stain­
less helps keep a pronounced, fresh muscat flavor in 
the wine. Femlentation results from a controlled bac­
terial activity. The microorganisms metabolize the 
natural sugars in the juice and dutifully transform it 
into alcohol and other, less evocative, byproducts. By 
letting fermentation run its course, you get a dry wine 
because most of the sugar has been digested by the 
The color ;s the key to the character of these two wines made 
from the muscat grape. The gold, almost amber color of Muscat 
de Beaumes de Ven;se (left) accurately indicates the wine's 
honey-like sweetness and slightly viscous feel. The pale straw 
color of Moscato d'Asti (right) corresponds to its fruity, quaffable 
taste and barely sparkling texture. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 59 ---
bacteria. Conversely, stop the fermentation early, and 
you get a sweet wine because not all the sugar has 
been made into alcohol. In some wines, the grapes 
are so sweet to start with that the yeasts stop working 
before a significant portion of the sugar is consumed. 
Some sweet wines, like Moscato d'Asti, are very 
low in alcohol and have a fresh, lively flavor. Others, 
like Muscat de Beaumes de Venise or the more well 
known Sauternes, are rich, viscous, and honeylike. 
The range in price is equally varied, from inexpen­
sive to very costly. 
As a rule of thumb, the lighter sweet wines are 
best served to complement, rather than contrast, 
the food they accompany. Because they're light in 
character, they go equally well with restrained, not­
so-savory appetizers as aperitifs and with light, not­
so-sweet, not-so-rich desserts. On the other hand, 
the richer, more viscous sweet wines make a more 
profound statement, and so can keep company with 
tastier, richer appetizers like foie gras. But a word of 
caution: most sweet wines just don't go well with 
intensely sweet, drop-dead desserts. That's because 
the sweetness of the dessert overwhelms the wine, 
leaving it tasting flat and insipid. 
ONE G RAPE, TWO G REAT WINES 
The first muscat wine I'll discuss is Muscat de 
Beaumes de Venise from France, with a rich, reso­
nant character. The other is from Italy-Moscato 
d' Asti. It's light, refreshing, and fun loving. 
Muscat de Beaumes de Venise-This Rhone 
Valley wine is a favorite of mine. Produced in 
Beaumes de Venise (near Avignon in southern 
France) from the grape variety muscat a petits grains, 
this wine is fairly heavy and very perfumed, primar­
ily with the scent of muscat grapes, but with over­
tones of peaches and apricots. Fermentation is 
stopped early by adding brandy to the wine. This 
practice is called fortifying the wine. The flavor of 
the muscat grape is kept alive, but the wine is much 
richer than the Italian Moscato d'Asti because it has 
a higher alcohol content due to the addition of the 
brandy. The alcohol is about 15 percent, which is 
low compared to other fortified wines like Port or 
Madeira, but twice that of the Moscato d'Asti. In 
France, where sweet wines are often served before 
the meal, Beaumes de Venise is usually served as an 
aperitif. (Indeed, France is the world's number-one 
importer of Port, and typically they drink it not as a 
dessert wine, but as an aperitif.) In the United 
States, we tend to use Muscat de Beaumes de Venise 
mostly as a dessert wine (and the same with Port) . 
It's all a matter of custom. 
But custom aside, Muscat de Beaumes de Venise 
is exceptionally delightful with a first course of pate 
or a slice of terrine. Not only can the Muscat stand 
up to these savory, high-fat dishes, but also it loses 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Perfect partners for 
dessert. The honeyed 
flavor and texture of 
Muscat de Beaumes 
de Venise gains more 
complexity when 
paired with salty blue 
cheese and ripe, 
sweet pears. 
59

--- Page 60 ---
60 
Serve light flavors 
with light, fruity 
Moscato d'Asti. Not­
too-sweet cookies or 
pastries won't over­
whelm the delicate 
spritzy quality of 
this wine. 
some of its sweetness to them, and so develops a 
drier, more interesting flavor. 
At the end of the meal, Muscat de Beaumes de 
Venise is best with blue-veined cheeses and ripe 
fruit, especially pears. The sweetness of the fruit and 
the sharp saltiness of the cheese seem to make the 
wine more complex. Muscat is also appropriate with 
tangier sweet desserts like an apple tart, or with 
slightly sweet, mellow flavors like those in a toasted 
hazelnut cake. 
Most Beaumes de Venise comes from the wine co­
operative, the communal wine-making operation 
where local farmers take their grapes. In France, and 
occasionally here, it is found in an ornate, flask-like 
bottle with a screw cap. Beaumes de Venise in a 
screw-cap bottle is generally not the finest quality. 
Most of what comes to the United States, however, is 
in a conventional, cork-finished bottle, sometimes 
Burgundy-shaped (slope-shouldered) bottle or in a 
tall, slender Alsace-style bottle. Several wine nego­
ciants (large bottlers and shippers) sell good-quality 
Muscat de Beaumes de Venise in America, including 
the "king of beaujolais" Georges Duboeuf, Paul 
Jaboulet Aine, and Chapoutier. The best, however, 
come from individual estates. These wines are in­
tensely flavored, yet well balanced. At least two estate 
wines are commonly available in the United States: 
Domaine de Coyeux and Domaine Durban. The 
prices range from the high teens for the negociant 
wines to the twenties for the estates; half bottles are 
available at slightly more than half the price of fulls. 
Unlike many other wines, Beaumes de Venise 
does not tend to pick up complexity with age, and 
the muscat flavor can become less distinct after sev­
eral years, so drink your Beaumes de Venise soon 
after you buy it to enjoy it at its peak. 
Moscato d' Asti-From Piedmont in northwest 
Italy, Moscato d'Asti is a delightful, frothy, light wine 
made from the moscato bianco grape, the Italian ver­
sion of muscat a petits grains. Moscato d' Asti should 
not be confused with Asti Spumante, though both 
are from the same region and both are made from 
muscat grapes. Asti Spumante is a sparkling wine, 
often excellent in its own right, but it doesn't cap­
ture the natural fruit like a good Moscato d'Asti. 
When making Moscato d'Asti, the fermentation is 
stopped early, thus preserving the fresh, perfumey 
grape flavors and keeping the alcohol low, about 
7 percent. Moscato d'Asti has a frizzante quality, a 
natural spritz, which causes a minor explosion on 
the palate, and which also enhances the muscat 
taste. Its lively, mou thwatering character stimulates 
the appetite, so this wine is often served before din­
ner as an aperitif. It's also perfect as a light, refresh­
ing, mid afternoon beverage. 
At the end of a meal, Moscato d'Asti is best 
served with simple, light desserts because the wine 
itself is light in body, fragrant, and fruity, and not 
cloyingly sweet. Simple pastries, nutty cookies, and 
fresh fruit or fruit-based desserts are delicious with 
the light but vivacious Moscato. This wine should 
be drunk young, not more than three years from the 
vintage date. The cost is about $ 1 2 to $16 a bottle. 
Many winemakers from the Piedmont are now pro­
ducing Moscato, and more of their production is 
becoming available in the United Sates. Names to 
look for include Ceretto, Rivetti, Casinetta, and 
Zardetto. If your local wine merchant doesn't stock 
a Moscato, he should be able to order one for you. 
Robert Feinn co-owns Mt. Carmel Wine & Spirits Co. 
in Hamden, Connecticut, with his brother Benjamin. 
The wine shop has been a family business since the re­
peal of prohibition. Feinn's interest in wine comes from 
both sides of his family. His mother's people owned the 
wine shop, while his father, a produce broker, shipped 
wine grapes from California every fall and sold them to 
local Italian families, who produced their own wines . • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 61 ---
Smoking fish at home 
is easy, and the results 
are moist, succulent, 
and tasty. jay Harlow 
home-smokes fish three 
different ways. This 
butterflied rainbow 
trout was smoked in a 
wok on top of the stove. 
Rice, tea leaves, and 
brown sugar provided 
the smoke and a soy 
and ginger marinade 
added even more flavor. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Smoking Fish at Home 
Three simple methods for kitchen or yard 
BY JAY HARLOW 
S moking transforms the flavor and texture of 
fresh fish in a most felicitous way. While tradi­
tional methods of smoking result in very dry, very 
salty forms that can survive for months at room tem­
perature, today's smoked-fish products are moister, 
less salty, and more perishable, although they still 
last longer than fresh fish. 
I'll describe three smoking techniques suitable 
for home cooks. One requires an inexpensive spe­
cialized smoking pan; the other two use a covered 
kettle barbecue and a Chinese wok. All three tech­
niques use hot-smoking (in the 200°F range) . Dur­
ing hot-smoking, the temperature of the fish gener­
ally rises to at least 140°, at which stage the protein 
coagulates to the firm consistency and opaque look 
that defines cooked fish. 
Fish smoking relies on the basic processes of cur­
ing and drying. Both inhibit spoilage by reducing the 
moisture in the fish that bacteria need. The curing 
stage uses salt (and sometimes sugar) to soak flavor 
into the fish and draw out excess moisture. The art 
of fish smoking lies in controlling the heat and the 
curing process. 
CHOOSING THE FISH 
Any fish can be smoked, but a higher fat content helps 
the fish stay moist, and a richer taste balances the 
smoke flavor best. Salmon, trout, char, and whitefish 
61

--- Page 62 ---
are my favorites. Other good choices include tuna, 
mackerel, bluefish, mullet, herring, sablefish (some­
times called black cod and butterfish), and sturgeon. 
Smaller fish can be smoked whole, but larger fish 
should be cut into manageable pieces. The best cuts 
are those that expose a lot of the fish surface to the 
smoke: whole small fillets, butterflied or kited fish 
(two boneless fillets attached by the skin) , or steaks 
or fillet cuts from larger fish. Don't remove the skin 
because it helps hold the meat together. Also, the 
fat lying between the skin and the meat supplies 
flavor and moisture. 
CURING THE FISH 
Most recipes call for a preliminary cure with salt, or 
sometimes a blend of salt and sugar. Some recipes call 
for two stages of brining, the first with straight salt, the 
second with sugar, spices, or other flavorings added. 
Use only pure salt (kosher or pickling salt); other salts 
may contain additives that will alter the flavor. Sugar 
has the same water-drawing effect and is often used to 
reduce the amount of salt in the finished product. Add 
10 percent sugar for a rounder, mellower taste. 
A 50/50 mixture will result in a definitely sweet cure. 
Experiment with proportions to suit your taste. De­
pending on the the type of fish and the smoking 
method you use, curing can take as little as 10 minutes 
or as long 24 hours. 
The simplest method of curing is to sprinkle the 
salt directly on the fish. Allow two teaspoons total 
salt and sugar per pound of boneless fish. Lay fillets 
skin side down in a shallow, nonreactive pan (glass, 
stainless steel, or enamel) , combine the sugar and 
salt, and sprinkle it all over the fish. Apply a heavier 
layer on the thickest part of the fillet; use a little less 
on the thinner tail and belly. 
Larger pieces of fish, such as a tuna loin (see the 
center photo at right) , are easier to cure in a brine. As 
a rule of thumb, use two tablespoons total salt and 
sugar per cup of water. A gallon-size locking plastic 
storage bag is handy for curing smaller pieces with a 
minimum of brine. Put the fish in the bag, measure in 
cold water to surround the fish, and then add the re­
quired salt or sugar. Expel the air, seal the bag, turn 
and shake it to dissolve the salt, and refrigerate. 
After either dry-salting or brining, soak the fish 
for 15 minutes in water or at least rinse it to remove 
excess salt from the surface. If time permits, air-dry 
the fish 15 minutes or more in a cool, breezy place 
before smoking. The outer surface of the fish will dry 
into a thin skin (pellicle), which gives an especially 
nice appearance to the finished fish and helps slow 
down the loss of moisture as it smokes. 
SMOKING MATERIALS 
Hickory, alder, oak, maple, and fruitwoods such as 
apple, pear, and cherry are all good choices for 
62 
smoking. Mesquite has its partisans, although I 
think it's more valuable as charcoal than as smok­
ing wood. Each wood imparts a slightly different 
fragrance; experiment with the ones available to 
you and see which you prefer. Some smokers are 
designed for a very coarse sawdust, others for chips. 
Prunings from fruit trees and even finely split fire­
wood will work in a charcoal grill or other live-fire 
setup. To get the maximum amount of smoke, soak 
Curing the fish is the 
first step. Dry·cure 
fillets with a sprinkling 
of salt or a mixture of 
salt and sugar. Use a 
heavier hand applying 
the cure to thicker 
areas of the fillet, and 
go lighter on the thin­
ner belly flap and tail 
section. 
An easy, mess-free 
way to brine large 
pieces of fish like the 
albacore loin at left, is 
in a one-gallon locking 
storage bag. Mix the 
brine right in the bag 
with the fish, and then 
put the whole bag in 
the refrigerator. 
Developing a "skin" 
retards drying. Once 
the cured fish has 
been rinsed and pat­
ted dry, fifteen minutes 
in a cool, breezy place 
is all it takes to give 
the fish a thin "skin" 
which slows down 
moisture loss during 
smoking. 
FI E COOKI G

--- Page 63 ---
BARBECUE 
SMOKING 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
chips or prunings in water before adding them to 
the fire. 
The smoker itself can be anything from a small 
covered pan to specialized smokers and homemade 
rigs. Before you start scouring the junkyards for an 
oil drum or an old refrigerator, try one of the fol-
Safety tips 
• Remember that 
smoking does not 
preserve fish indef­
initely; it's still per­
ishable and needs 
refrigeration. Freeze 
if storing longer than 
a week. 
Instant-reading 
thermometer 
Fire with smoldering 
wood chips 
• Some fish are 
hosts to parasites that 
can affect humans. 
Thorough cooking or 
long, deep freezing 
destroys these para­
sites. During clean­
ing, inspect the fish 
for pin-sized worms. 
If any are present, or 
just to be safe, cook 
until the meat is 
opaque in the center. 
lowing techniques, which uses standard or readily 
available cooking equipment. 
BARBECUE SMOKING 
A covered kettle barbecue is ideal for smoking larger 
pieces of fish. The heat source is a small charcoal 
fire, with hardwood chips or fruitwood cuttings for 
smoke. The key to this technique is controlling the 
temperature by regulating the top and bottom vents. 
With a little practice, you can get a fire that smolders 
at around 200° for close to an hour, long enough to 
smoke a good-sized salmon fillet. Dangle an instant­
reading thermometer through the top vent to mon­
itor the temperature. 
Fillet the fish, leaving the skin on. Remove the 
pin bones (small bones running down the center of 
the fillet) with tweezers or needle-nose pliers. Dry­
salt with three parts salt and one part sugar; cover 
and refrigerate eight hours or overnight. 
An hour before you begin smoking, drain off the 
juices that have collected around the fish. Cover with 
cold water, let stand 15 minutes, drain, and repeat. 
Then pat dry. For a smoother surface, lay the fillets on 
a wire rack in a cool, breezy place for 15 minutes to dry. 
While the fish is soaking, start a small charcoal 
fire (about a dozen briquettes) at one edge of the 
kettle and let it burn down until coated with gray 
ash. Meanwhile, soak Vz cup of wood chips in water. 
Set the top and bottom vents of the barbecue about 
90 percent closed. Drain the chips and add them to 
the coals. Set the grill in place and lay the fish on the 
grill on the side opposite the fire, with the thickest 
part nearest the heat. Cover and cook until the fish 
is opaque, 30 to 40 minutes, adjusting the vents to 
maintain the temperature at 180° to 200°. Add some 
dry wood chips to the fire after 15 minutes. To test 
for doneness, carefully bend the fillet to open the 
flakes and look into the center; the fish should be 
turning from translucent to opaque. Let the fish 
cool, wrap it, and chill before serving. 
• Know the source of 
your fish, especially 
if it's sport-caught. 
Check with your 
state or local health 
authorities to see if 
there are any warn­
ings on fish from 
local waters. Buy 
commercial fish 
only from reputable 
dealers. 
• Use only wood 
products specifically 
packaged for smoking 
food; some commer­
cial lumber is treated 
with toxic preserva­
tives, like chromated 
copper arsenate. 
Prunings from un­
sprayed fruit trees are 
fine, but remove the 
bark if the tree has 
been sprayed.-J.H.

--- Page 64 ---
STOVETOP SMOKER BOX 
If you smoke small to moderate amounts of fish, con­
sider a single-purpose smoker than can work with a 
gas or electric range, or even a camp stove. One is the 
Cameron Smoker Cooker, by CM. International (see 
Sources at right). The Cameron is basically a stainless­
steel rectangular pan with a sliding cover, a drip pan, 
and a rack. This unit can accommodate a couple of 
medium-sized trout, several fish steaks, a center cut of 
salmon, or a two-pound albacore loin. The special 
coarse wood dust it uses smolders from the indirect 
heat of a burner under the pan. The following recipe 
will also work in other self-contained home smokers, 
like the Little Chief model (see Sources at right) . 
Brine up to two pounds of fish in a straight salt 
brine for 20 minutes. Drain, rinse with a couple of 
changes of fresh water, and then brine a second time 
with half salt and half brown sugar plus a tablespoon 
or so of mixed pickling spices. Let stand 20 minutes, 
drain, and let dry on a rack for at least 15 minutes. 
Prepare the smoker according to the maker's 
directions. In the Cameron smoker, this means 
spreading about two tablespoons of wood dust in the 
bottom of the pan, and then placing the drip pan 
and rack on top. Lay the fish on the rack, cover 
the pan, and cook over medium heat until the fish 
registers 1400 on an instant-reading thermometer, 
1 2 to 18 minutes depending on thickness. 
STOVETOP SMOKING I N A WOK 
Perhaps the easiest smoking method of all is Chinese­
style, in a wok. With the same setup used to produce 
the famous smoked tea duck, you can marinate and 
cook a couple of fillets, steaks, or small whole fish in 
less than an hour from start to finish. Instead of wood, 
however, the smoke source is a mixture of equal parts 
raw rice, brown sugar, and tea leaves. The salting stage 
is also simpler, replaced by a marinade of soy sauce, 
ginger, and scallion. Because relarively little salt is in­
volved, just think of this as a flavorful way of cooking 
fish for immediate consumption. 
You'll need a wok 14 inches in diameter or larger 
Serving hot--smoked fish 
• Smoked fish can be served hot from the 
smoker as an appetizer or main dish, but as 
most varieties are on the salty side, a little can 
go a long way. Try it in smaller quantities as an 
accent in potato salad and other salads. For a 
delicious pasta sauce, add small pieces of 
smoked fish at the last minute to a mixture of 
com kernels, scallions, and cream. Or stir 
some into a risotto with fresh peas just long 
enough to reheat the fish. 
with a tight-fitting lid, and a wire cake rack that will 
fit inside under the lid. 
Place the fish (a butterflied trout, a couple of 
skin-on fillets, or a few steaks) in a shallow bowl. 
Sprinkle with a tablespoon or two of soy sauce and a 
large pinch of sugar, and add a few slices of ginger 
and a scallion cut into I-inch lengths, both crushed 
with the side of a broad knife. Marinate 1 0 to 
20 minutes, turning occasionally. 
Line the inside of the wok and the lid with large 
sheets of heavy-duty foil. Let the excess drape over the 
rim. Combine Y4 cup each rice, tea leaves (black or 
oolong), and brown sugar and spread the mixture in a 
6-inch circle in the middle of the wok. Put the wire 
rack in place and tum the heat to high. When the sug­
ar begins to smolder, drain the fish, wiping off the ex­
cess marinade, and put it on the rack. Put the lid on 
the wok and crimp the two layers of foil together to 
hold in the smoke. Reduce the heat to medium high 
Drip pan 
STOVETOP SMOKER BOX 
• A little smoked fish added to cream cheese 
is a classic spread for bagels and other breads. 
Or reverse the proportions, using a little cream 
cheese or butter to bind mashed smoked fish 
in a terrine. 
• Don't expect to slice hot-smoked fish the way 
you can lox; the smoked fish will crumble if cut 
too thin. Cubes, chunks, or thick slices are 
easier to handle. Or flake it apart.-J.H. 
FI E COOKING

--- Page 65 ---
WOK SMOKING 
Rice, tea, and 
brown sugar 
Wok 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
Fish 
Wire rack 
Foil 
and cook 10 minutes for thin fillets or butterflied fish, 
1 2 minutes for thick steaks. Some smoke will leak out, 
so use the exhaust fan if you have one. 
When the smoking time is up, turn off the heat 
and turn the fan to its highest setting. (If you don't 
have an exhaust fan, you may want to open the 
wok near an open window or door, or carry it out­
side. Even so, the amount of smoke produced isn't 
enough to set off a smoke alarm or perfume your 
clothing.) Carefully unfold the foil (don't tear it, 
in case you have to cook the fish longer) and re-
Wok smoking is the easiest and fastest method. Harlow 
smokes soy-marinated trout in a lidded, foil-lined wok. 
Equal parts rice, brown sugar, and tea leaves provide the 
aromatic smoke. 
move the lid. Test the fish for doneness by probing 
with a skewer in the thickest part; the skewer 
should penetrate evenly and easily. Wrap the foil 
up around the smoking mixture, set aside to cool, 
and discard. Serve the fish hot, with rice and a 
simple vegetable. 
Once you get the hang of the wok smoking tech­
nique, you can add whole spices such as star anise, 
Sichuan peppercorns, and cassia or cinnamon bark 
to the basic smoking mix. Or skip the rice mixture 
entirely and use wood chips (the smallest kind 
available) or dust. 
The dry heat of smoking is hard on the finish of 
the wok. If you use the same wok for stir-frying, oil it 
well after smoking. If you find you like this method, 
you may want to dedicate one wok to smoking. 
SOURCES 
For the closest source of the Cameron Smoker Cooker 
and the wood dust it uses, contact the manufacturer, 
eM. International, 2527 Weston Rd., Colorado Springs, 
CO 8091 0; 71 9/390-0505. The Cameron model is also 
available from International Home Cooking, 854 Tiffany 
Blvd., Rocky Mount, NC 27804; 800/237-7423. 
The Little Chief is sold at many sporting goods stores. 
For the store nearest you, contact the manufacturer, 
Luhr Jensen, Inc., PO Box 297, Hood River, OR 97031; 
800/535-1 71 1 . Luhr Jensen also sells a variety of wood 
dusts for its smoker. 
Jay Harlow is a former restaurant chef, a seafood 
columnist for the San Francisco Chronicle, and the 
author of nine cookbooks. He smokes fish at home in 
California's Bay Area . • 
65

--- Page 66 ---
More than Strawberry 
Shortcakes 
How to make a great shortcake and adapt it to your taste 
BY SHANNON McKIN N EY 
M
y partner and I own and operate a country 
restaurant and bakery, and we've noticed 
that more and more of our customers are looking 
for fresh, homey desserts like shortcakes. I love to 
create new desserts, so when I saw how popular our 
mixed-berry shortcake was, I decided to experiment 
with different fruit and filling combinations. 
Although strawberry is the classic partner for short­
cakes, many fruits can be paired with the basic bis­
cuit. No matter what fruit you use, the textures and 
tastes derived from the combination of fleshy fruit, 
crisp shortcake, and velvety whipped cream is noth­
ing short of gastronomic bliss. 
One thing I learned in my training as a pastry 
chef is that it's important to learn the basics first. 
So I'll begin with the basics, by telling you exactly 
how to make a perfect berry shortcake. From there, 
you'll be able to make my variations, and you can go 
on to create your own new shortcake desserts. 
WHAT ARE SHORTCAKES? 
Shortcakes are small, tender, sweetened biscuits. 
They are usually flat and round, ranging in diameter 
from 1 to 4 inches for individual servings. Some 
shortcakes are larger and cut into pieces like a pie. 
While most shortcakes are round, there's no reason 
not to cut yours into stars, moons, triangles, dogs, 
cats, or whatever you like. The term "short" refers to 
the crumbly, melt-in-your-mouth texture that is the 
hallmark of this dessert. Shortness is achieved by 
working the fat into the flour until the fat is in small 
granules, which makes a tender, coarse-grained 
crumb. Shortcakes should be light, airy, just barely 
brown, and delicious enough to eat on their own. 
Basic shortcake biscuits consist of flour, fat, 
leavening agent, liquid, and flavoring. All-purpose 
flour works fine, but a low-gluten cake or pastry 
flour will work better, yielding a more tender short-
66 
Crisp, tender biscuit, juicy berries, and rich whipped cream 
make the quintessential shortcake. The biscuit gets its characteristic 
"short" texture from the bits of fat mixed with the dry ingredients. 
This is different from a "flaky" texture, which comes from larger 
pieces of fat that, when rolled out, form leaves or flakes of pastry. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 67 ---
MAKING SHORTCAKE DOUG H 
Rub the shortening ond flour between your finger­
tips to blend them to the right consistency. Keep 
working until the mixture looks like very coorse meal. 
Your hand is the best utensil for mixing the 
dough just right. Stop as soon as the flour is 
moistened and the ingredients form a loose dough. 
Your dough will be rough, but that's how it 
should be. Don't be tempted to work it until 
smooth; gentle handling produces a tender biscuit. 
cake. Fat types are also interchangeable; you can 
choose butter, margarine, vegetable shortening, 
even lard. Fats with higher melting points, such as 
vegetable shortening, will give shortcakes a lighter 
consistency. If you want a buttery flavor, you can al­
ways spread on some butter after baking. No matter 
which fat you choose, chill it until it's firm before 
using, so that your finished dough will be cool, firm, 
and easier to roll out. 
The biscuits are leavened by baking powder, 
which, in the presence of moisture and heat, gives 
off carbon dioxide gas. There's really no other leav­
ening agent appropriate for shortcakes. 
The right liquid is more a matter of personal pref­
erence than of chemistry, and you can choose be­
tween milk or water. Whole milk, two-percent milk, 
or buttermilk will give the shortcakes a finer texture, 
better food value, and a richer flavor. Water, how­
ever, will also give satisfactory results. Chill the 
liquid before making your dough. 
Salt and sugar are always added to shortcake 
dough, but there are many wonderful optional addi­
tions, such as vanilla extract, grated citrus zest, cin­
namon, chocolate chips, candied ginger, pecans, al­
monds, cocoa, coconut, poppy seeds, or raisins. 
MAKING AND BAKING THE BISCUIT DOUGH 
Here's the basic procedure for making any shortcake 
dough. Combine the flour, sugar, salt, and baking 
powder in a bowl, stir a little to mix these ingredi­
ents, and then add the fat. Incorporate the fat into 
the flour mixture by taking a big pinch of the ingre­
dients and rubbing your fingertips together lightly. 
Work like this until only very small lumps of fat re­
main, nothing larger than a small pea. Stir in any 
dry flavorings such as citrus zest or nuts at this point. 
Add the chilled liquid and mix with your hand just 
until the flour is completely moistened and the in-
JUNE/JULY 1994 
gredients form a loose dough. Don't overmix, or 
you'll get a tough shortcake. 
Pat out the dough onto a floured surface and roll 
it out until it's about h inch thick. Cut the dough in­
to the desired shapes, using a biscuit cutter or a 
sharp knife; dip the cutter or knife into some flour 
between each cut to prevent the dough from stick­
ing. Reroll any scraps and cut again. Only do this 
once, though, because the dough gets tough if you 
handle it a lot. 
Arrange the shortcakes about an inch apart on a 
parchment-lined sheet pan and bake them in a pre­
heated oven. As for baking temperatures and times, 
no two ovens bake exactly the same, so these fac­
tors will vary. Aim for very lightly colored biscuits 
that have just about doubled in height. A little ex­
perimentation might be necessary to get the perfect 
conditions, but 400°F for 15 to 20 minutes is a good 
place to start. If you use a convection oven (which is 
what we use at the bakery) , the temperature will be 
slightly lower and the time slightly less. 
Some shortcake recipes call for brushing the 
raw dough with an egg wash or milk, dusting it 
with granulated sugar before baking, or a combi­
nation of these. This is to promote caramelization, 
which gives the shortcakes a deeper color and a 
crispier surface. In our recipes, the tops of the bis­
cuits really don't show, so this step isn't necessary. 
When the shortcakes are baked, remove them 
from the oven, peel them off the parchment, and 
let them cool on a rack. 
Ideally, you should use the fresh shortcakes the 
day they're baked. However, you may wrap them 
tightly in plastic film and store them in the refriger­
ator for up to a week. Just reheat the biscuits lightly 
in the oven before serving. You can also cover and 
freeze the cut, unbaked biscuits, and bake them as 
needed. Don't defrost them; just take them directly 
Stamp out your bis­
cuits economically, so 
you get a minimum of 
scraps. You can reroll 
scraps once, but after 
that the dough will get 
too tough. 
BASIC 
SHORTCAKE 
BISCUITS 
Makes 8 biscuits cut 
with a 3-inch round 
cutter. 
12 ounces (22J:J cups) 
all-purpose flour 
2 tablespoons sugar 
1 teaspoon salt 
1 tablespoon plus 2 
teaspoons baking 
powder 
4 ounces (2J:J cup) 
vegetable 
shortening, chilled 
1 cup buttermilk, 
chilled 
2 teaspoons vanilla 
extract 
67

--- Page 68 ---
Shortcake goes Hawaiian with fresh pineapple and roasted 
macadamia nuts, all bathed in sweet, amber caramel. 
Spike fresh oranges with a splash of Grand Mamier for a sophisticated shortcake. A few 
shavings of bitter chocolate add contrasting color and flavor. 
BASIC BERRY 
FILLING 
Enough for 8 biscuits. 
1 cup strawberries 
1 cup blackberries 
1 cup raspberries 
y" cup sugar, or to 
taste 
BASIC WHIPPED 
CREAM 
Enough for 8 biscuits. 
2 cups heavy cream 
y" cup sugar, or to 
taste 
1. tablespoon vanilla 
extract 
68 
from the freezer to the oven, but reduce the heat 
slightly and let them cook a few minutes longer. 
NOT J UST STRAWBERRIES 
Before you decide what filling to make, find out what 
fruit is ripe and in season. Whether you buy whole­
sale or shop at the local market, use your senses to 
judge the freshest ingredients. Fresh, ripe fruit will 
not only look good, it will smell delicious, too. 
The fruit for shortcakes, no matter what type, 
needs only simple preparation. Peel the fruit, if neces­
sary, and slice it into small pieces (pick out any seeds) . 
Put it in a bowl and sprinkle with a few spoonfuls of 
sugar. (Don't use an aluminum bowl because the met­
al could react with the acid in the fruit.) Toss it lightly 
just to mix, then cover the bowl and let it sit for about 
an hour at room temperature. The sugar will draw the 
natural juices out of the fruit, making a tasty liquid for 
moistening the shortcake biscuits. Taste your fruit 
mixture; if it's a little flat, add a tablespoon or two of 
fresh lemon juice for a flavor pick-me-up. When using 
delicate fruit such as raspberries or blackberries, re­
serve some of the whole berries before mixing with 
sugar for garnishing the final presentation. 
A simple mix of fruit and sugar is the classic filling 
for shortcakes, but you can have fun and be creative by 
adding a splash of liqueur such as Triple Sec, Grand 
Marnier, Framboise, Kirschwasser, or any good cognac. 
MAKING PERFECT WHIPPED CREAM 
Whipping heavy cream is a simple process, but fol­
lowing these tips will give you better whipped cream 
every time. When shopping for cream, try to find 
one that is pasteurized, but not ultrapasteurized. 
Ultrapasteurization (a process that kills bacteria and 
extends shelf life) brings cream to a high heat level 
that actually breaks down the molecules of fat in the 
product. These fat molecules are necessary for good 
whipped cream because they trap air and liquid dur­
ing the whipping process, giving the cream the fluffy 
volume it needs. A pasteurized-only cream will whip 
faster and keep its shape and volume longer. 
Always chill your utensils before whipping cream. 
Start with a clean, cold, stainless-steel, glass, or ce­
ramic bowl (not aluminum, which can react with the 
whisk and give a gray tinge to the cream, nor plastic, 
which won't really hold the cold). Add the cream, 
and whip quickly with a wire whisk until the cream is 
slightly thickened. Now add the sugar and any flavor­
ings. Continue to whip until the cream forms soft 
peaks. Don't whip beyond the soft-peak stage, be­
cause the cream will get stiff and curdled. Cover the 
bowl and refrigerate the cream until you're ready to 
assemble the shortcakes. Whipped cream made with 
good-quality cream should last for 24 hours. 
PUTTING IT ALL TOG ETHER 
The finished shortcakes should be made to order as 
you need them. Assembling the desserts ahead of 
time and refrigerating will make the biscuits too 
firm. Also, room temperature fruit is much more fla­
vorful than cold fruit. 
Split the biscuits by pulling them apart, and place 
the bottom of the biscuit on the serving plate. Gently 
spoon the fruit and juice mixture onto the biscuit and 
top with a small amount of whipped cream. Put the re­
maining biscuit half on top of the fruit and spoon more 
fruit and juice on top. Add another dollop of whipped 
cream and garnish with some whole berries or chunks 
of fruit. Serve immediately, and, above all, enjoy. 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 69 ---
Mellow white chocolate and tart, juicy cherries contrast deliciously. Because the mousse is rich and creamy, there's no need to 
serve them shortcake with whipped cream. 
ORANGE AND GRAND MARNIER SHORTCAKES 
Enough for 8 biscuits. 
2 tsp. grated orange zest 
5 oranges, peeled and sectioned (see Basics), with their juice, 
soaked in ୃ cup Grand Mamier liqueur, and sprinkled 
with 14 cup light brown sugar 
Grated bitter chocolate 
Add the orange zest to the basic biscuit dough. Assemble 
the shortcakes as directed and sprinkle with the bitter 
chocolate. 
PINEAPPLE, CARAMEL, AND ROASTED 
MACADAMIA NUT SHORTCAKES 
Enough for 8 biscuits. 
214 cups sugar 
1 cup heavy cream ୂ
 cup macadamia nuts, salted or unsalted 
é beaten egg white 
1 tsp. sugar 
1 large fresh pineapple, peeled, cored, cut in é-in. pieces, 
and sprinkled with 14 cup sugar 
Make a caramel sauce-Put 2% cups sugar in a large, 
heavy pan and heat, stirring constantly with a wooden 
spoon, until the sugar is melted (there will be lumps). Keep 
stirring until all the lumps disappear and the sugar is a 
medium-dark amber. Remove from the heat and carefully 
stir in % cup heavy cream. (The caramel will spatter, so 
stand back.) Add the rest of the cream and stir until com­
pletely smooth. Keep warm until ready to serve; store extra 
caramel sauce in the refrigerator for up to a month. 
Glaze and roast the macadamia nuts-Stir the nuts, 
egg white, and 1 tsp. sugar until combined. Spread the 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
nuts on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper or foil 
and bake 1 3 to 1 5 min. in a 325°F oven. Cool completely. 
Assemble the shortcakes as directed. topping with the 
caramel sauce and macadamia nuts. 
CHERRY AND WHITE-CHOCOLATE MOUSSE 
SHORTCAKES 
Enough for 8 biscuits. 
2 cups heavy cream 
8 oz. white chocolate, finely chopped 
12 oz. (2 cups) pitted fresh cherries, soaked in 14 cup dark 
rum, and sprinkled with 14 cup sugar 
Make a white chocolate mousse-Start the mousse 8 to 
24 hours before serving. Bring ?'3 cup heavy cream to a 
boil. Remove from the heat and add the white chocolate. 
Stir until completely melted. Transfer to a medium bowl 
and let cool until tepid. Put the rest of the cream in a 
chilled bowl and whip until soft peaks form. With a rubber 
spatula, gently but quickly fold the whipped cream into the 
white chocolate mixture until just combined. Cover and re­
frigerate at least 8 hours. Assemble the shortcakes as direct­
ed, piping the mousse around the top and bottom cakes. 
Shannon McKinney graduated from the Culinary 
Institute of America in 1 984, and then apprenticed for 
two years with world-renowned pastry chef Albert 
Kumin. In 1 986, he and partner Brian Doyle opened 
their bakery, McKinney & Doyle Fine Foods, in Pawl­
ing, New York, where he applies his classical pastry 
training to a full range of all-American desserts . • 
69

--- Page 70 ---
70 
Whether you're a professional chef 
or a home gourmet, you know that 
a quality 
knife 
makes a world of 
difference. And nothing defines quality 
quite like Ludwig Schiff, of Solingen, 
Germany. To make the point, here are 
some great restaurants that use Ludwig 
Schiff knives every day ... 
Le Cirque 
Lutece 
The Plaza 
The 21 Club 
The Water Club 
The Waldorf-Astoria 
3112" PARING KNIFE $21.95 
4Y," UTILITY KNIFE $21.95 (nol shown) 
5" BONING KNIFE $22.95 
7"' FILLET KNIFE $29.95 (nol shown) 
r OFFSET KNIFE $34.95 
10" OFFSET KNIFE $39.95 (nol shown) 
10" SERRATED CHEF'S $39.95 
10" SLICER $44.95 
10" HOllOW GROUND SLICER $39.95 (nol shown) 
10" CHEF'S KNIFE $59.95 
8" CHEF'S KNIFE $53.95 (nol shown) 
10" SHARPENING STEEl $22.95 (nol shown) 
Order your Ludwig Schiff knives 
today. Call 800-FLASH-21 Toll-Free 
or Fax Order to 516-422-2358. 
FLASHSEPAN 
Where quality meets the 
discrimillatillg shopper. 
<)5 East Main St.. Bahylon. NY 1 1 702 
EXOTIC MEATS Bison, Wild 
Boar, Alligator, Hare, Venison, Elk, 
Antelope, Wild Turkey, Quail, Goose, 
Pheasant, Emu, Frog Legs, Turtle, and 
much more. 
Quail Eggs, Prawns Pates, 
Mousses, Fresh Foie Gras. 
Also Spices & Kitchen 
Accessories 
Krups · Kitchell Aid . J.A. Hellckels. 
1-800-237-7423 
International HomeCooking 
854 Tiffany Blvd. 
Rocky Mount, N.C. 27804 
$2.00 Catalog rebate certificate 
MCIVisa 
INDIANAPOLIS 
CULINARY 
INSTITUTE 
Inspired by traditional French cuisine and 
today 's modern lifestyle, the Indianapolis 
Culinary Institute is based on a special, 
intense twelve week program. The only one of 
its kind in the Midwest, this program allows 
students to learn and experience theory 
demonstration and practical application of 
the fund·amentals of the culinary arts. 
If your goal is to work in thefoodservice 
industry, open your own restaurant, or simply 
learn the secrets of professional chefs, the 
Indianapolis Culinary Institute will help you 
develop the skills you need. 
Class size is limited. 
Call for Information and Brochure. 
(800) 334-4449 
8250 Dean Road 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46240 
C\JLINȾ 
(IC(j 
ʐ.-
Ƚ 
·7(JNI • ާި
 
THIS INSTITUTION IS REGULATED BY 
THE INDIANA COMMISSION ON 
PROPRIETARY EDUCATION (AC·O IOO) 
THE ORIGINAL 
CRACK & PEEL 
The Fast and Easy Way 
to 
Crack and Peel Garlic 
and More 
Made in the USA - Made of Solid Maple 
cutting Board & companion Bowl 
Also Available 
Look for "Crack & Peel" in a store near you. 
If you can't find "Crack & Peel" call and 
we'll help you locate a store. 
Canterbury's Crack & Peel, Inc. 
109 1/2 Pleasant Street 
Claremont, New Hampshire 03743 
1-800-551-0946 
WIt\' 
YOU SHOULD 
SHOP AT 
§VANCY'S 
rPECIALTY 
· 
tJv1ARKET, 
F ʑIfC, 
'''] 
a) You love to cook. 
b) You enjoy ethnic cuisines. 
c) Hard-To-Find Specialty Food Items are 
not available at your local markets. 
Look to laney's Specialty iarket for 
Hard-To-Find EthnielRegional Food 
Specialties PLUS cookware and table­
ware from around the world. 
Send $2.00 for a catalog and receive 
$5.00 crediL on your order. 
Nancfs Specially MarkeL 
POB 1302 Dept FC41 
Stamford, CT, 06904 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 71 ---
ADoNOTM 
THE 
LFONS 
AUTHENTIC 
LARGEST 
MEXICAN 
ASSORTMENT 
F 0 0 D S 
INGREDIENTS 
OF CHILES 
AND 
IN THE U.S.! 
UTENSILS! 
PHON E 
FAX 
1.800.456.6100 
1.800.765.7373 
P.O. BOX 201988 AUSTI N, TEXAS 78720-1988 
.Jl WARD CWINNING 
lJ\.ECIPES 
AT A 
TOUCH OF A <BUTTON 
We are proud to offer a 
collection of recipes from our 
Cordon Bleu medal winning 
Chef. 
Now you can create the finest 
haute cuisine as easily as the 
Master Chefs. 
From the backyard barbecue to 
lobster thermadore , 
The 
CompuChef Kitchen™ will 
allow you to view, print, and 
add any recipe you like. 
Send check or money order for 
$ 1 9.95 + $2.75 shipping & 
handling to: 
® 
CompuChef Inc. 
9769 Deerfoot Drive 
Ft. Myers, FL 33919 
(813) 433-5110 
Florida residents 6% sales laX 
Karen . Ware 
7 -Ply Induction Stainless Steel Cookware 
Extra Heavy 
22 Piece Waterless Cookware 
Lifetime Warranty 
1-800-337 -2404 
Visa 
Me 
Discover 
AmEx 
Also Available in Stainless Steel: 
• Woks 
• Saute Pans 
• Griddles 
• Roasters 
• Cutlery 
• Bake Sets 
• Large Stock Pots 
Karen Ware Int'l 430 E. San Bernardino Rd. 
Covina, CA 91723 
Coupon Coupon Coupon 
For information or free brochure, 
Name ___________ __ 
Address __________ __ 
City/State/Zip _______ _ 
1 st 1 00 Inquiries Receive 
30% OFF! 
The 
INTERNATIONAL COOKING SCHOOL 
OF ITALIAN FOOD AND WINE 
Acclaimed ((Best Cooking Class Vacation» in Italy with 
Mary Beth Clark. Learn to make delicious specialties from 
vegetable antipasti, pasta, risotto, main dishes through il dolce. 
Full participation week-long courses in May, July, September 
and October. Basics of Great Italian Cooking, September Wine Harvest in Tuscany, 
October Truffle Festival in Piedmont. 
Tel: (212) 779- 1921 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
"" Send for Brochure "" 
201 East 28th Street, Suite 1 5-B 
New York, NY 10016-8538 Fax: (212) 779-3248 
Imagine your delight in 
receiving two full bottles of 
six different wines every three 
months. The 12 bottles in 
each shipment are especially 
hand-selected fine wines from 
around the world. At your 
request, we'll custo
mize 
these 
cases to reflect your taste 
preference in wines . 
Direct Wines will even cater 
to the connoisseur in you by 
including detailed tasting 
notes on each different wine 
in every shipment. 
Join our unique wine club 
today. You'll eMoy the 
benefits of great tasting wines 
at fantastic prices. Our 
introductory offer of only 
$95.40, plus shipping and 
handling is available for a 
limited time . .. AND your 
membership fee is waived. 
To help get 
acquainted we'll 
include a free 
handsome acrylic 
wine server and 
a tasting notes binder 
with your first 
shipment. 
71

--- Page 72 ---
BASICS 
In this department, experts present 
foundation recipes, define culinary 
terms, and describe basic preparation 
and cooking techniques. Readers are 
invited to send us pieces on their best 
methods of work. 
Peeling and Segmenting 
Citrus Fruit 
white pith, but try not to cut into the 
flesh itself (see photos at left) . 
Pick up the peeled fruit, hold it over a 
bowl to catch the juices while you work, 
and begin cutting away each segment 
from the membrane. Slide the knife 
blade between the membrane and the 
flesh of one side of a segment, and then 
slide it on the other side of the segment, 
cutting the segment free (see photo 
above) . Remove the segment with your 
knife and set it aside. Continue with the 
next segment, and keep working your 
way around the fruit, folding back the 
empty membranes like the pages of a 
book. When you've removed all the seg­
ments of flesh, squeeze the membrane to 
remove any remaining juice. Store the 
peeled segments in the juice until you're 
ready to use them, or use the juice for 
something else and store the segments 
wrapped in plastic. 
-Gary A. Coley, private chef, Atlanta, 
Georgia 
Individual segments of citrus fruit that 
have had all the covering membranes re-
moved make beautiful and delicious ad-
Trussing a Roast 
ditions to both sweet and savory dishes. 
The French term for these peeled seg­
ments is supremes, and the technique 
used to cut them is called peeling a vif 
(ah VEEF) , or peeling to the quick. 
To peel and segment any citrus fruit, 
first cut away both ends of the fruit just 
down to the flesh. Set the fruit on the 
work surface and, with a sharp knife, cut 
away the skin, working in wide bands 
from top to bottom. Cut all the way 
through the skin and the underlying 
72 
Any long, slim roast, whether stuffed or 
unstuffed, can benefit by being trussed 
before roasting. Meat has a natural ten­
dency to twist and curl as the different 
fibers in the meat shrink during cooking. 
Trussing helps to keep the meat straight, 
so that the shape remains perfect. I use 
standard butcher's twine, which is 
pretty thick, but any kitchen twine will 
do. I don't pull the twine too tightly or 
it will bite into the meat, creating a rip­
pled effect. But I don't leave it loose, 
either, because as the meat shrinks a 
little, the twine will lose its grip. 
To truss, I put the roast in front of me, 
with one short end toward me. I take a 
long piece of twine (about ten times 
longer than the roast) and tie one end of 
the twine around the far end of the roast 
(I leave a few inches of twine at the end 
of the knot for the final tying) . As a 
right-hander, I hold the length of the 
twine in my left hand, about four inches 
from the meat. With my right hand, 
I make a loop, which I slip over the far 
end of the meat and gently pull about 
an inch past the first loop. The roast will 
now be bound in two places-my origi­
nal tie and now this loop. I continue un-
til the roast is completely trussed, spac­
ing the loops about an inch apart (see 
photo above). As I go, I tug gently on the 
twine to snug up the loops and to align 
the knots (see photo below) . 
When I reach the end of the roast, I 
flip it over and bring the twine up the 
length of the meat, slipping the twine 
through each loop of string to catch and 
secure it. At the top, I tie the two loose 
ends together and trim off any excess 
string. Now I'm ready to roast. 
-HartmutHarulke, CMC, chefarulown­
erofHarulke's Cuisine in Columbus, Ohio • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 73 ---
1993, SALOV North America Corp

SOIL.

The well-drained rocky soil of Mediterranean hills and plains.
The finest olive-producing region on earth.

| A ( ) 4
j . mW
o +

t

A special selection of the finest olives | Dic ed “at their peak of flavor and quickly pressed
according to ancient, time-honored methods.

UQUET

From Extra Mild's subtle olive essence” to Extra Virgin's lush, fruity scents.

6
From full, rich and fruity with peppery notes of Extra Virgin
to slightly sweet and delicate Extra Mild, all are imported from Italy.

THE DIFFERENCE IN OLIVE OIL
IS LIKE THE DIFFERENCE TN WINE.

EXTRAVIRGIN
OLIVE OIL

A -

AND THERE IS FILIPPO BERIO:

--- Page 74 ---
REVIEWS 
How`To`Cook Books 
lAVAIR.ENNE 
P R A T I Q U E 
lec'-,ues. 'TeJlenls,ަ lools of clouoc rnock.rn CUISIne 
w,lh _. Ii",. 2.500 [.II colo. pholos,apl.. 
ANNE WILLAN 
Everyone who cooks, or who wants to 
cook, needs a reliable resource in the 
kitchen-a single-volume reference to 
take the terror out of cooking, to increase 
the comfort level when working with 
food, and to make cooking more fun. 
One of the following books may be that 
resource for you. 
La Varenne Pratique, by Anne Willan. 
CROWN BOOKS, 1989. $60, HARDCOVER; 528 PP. 
ISBN 0-517-57383-0. 
If you're looking for one reference to 
help you achieve competence in the 
kitchen, then this "illustrated cooking 
course" is it. Winner of the 1989 IACP/ 
Seagram Award for Best General and 
Basic Cookbook, La Varenne Pratique 
offers extensive guidelines for identify­
ing, choosing, and storing ingredients; 
techniques for preparing and cooking 
food; serving tips; and recipes. All this 
is done with a series of well-crafted, 
step-by-step photographs of ingredients 
and techniques. 
Each chapter begins with a broad 
overview. For example, "Pastry & Cook­
ies" starts with a statement on basic pas­
try ingredients, techniques for making 
pastry by hand or by machine, chilling, 
storing, rolling, and filling pies. The 
chapter continues with clear, detailed de-
74 
scriptions of various types of doughs, 
complemented with stunning color 
photographs of making, shaping, and 
cooking various pastries. 
Most of the ingredients discussed in the 
book are linked with a "Useful Informa­
tion" box, which supplies detailed back­
ground and technical data. For instance, 
under crayfish, you will find common 
names, availability, how to choose, nutri­
tive value, cooking methods, determining 
doneness, storage, and typical dishes. In 
general, recipes illustrate each technique 
and range from simple to complex. 
One of the choicest aspects of the 
book is the section on meat cuts, which 
shows the large carcass divisions and 
smaller retail cuts for beef, veal, lamb, 
and pork. Another valuable illustrated 
section is the crystal-clear photo series 
on checking stages of sugar syrup. 
While La Varenne Pratique is slightly 
scholarly, its information is easy to find 
and easy to read. The book is well worth 
its price. 
Better Homes and Gardens Complete 
Guide to Food and Cooking. MEREDITH 
BOOKS, 199 1 . $29.95, HARDCOVER; 480 PP. ISBN 
0-696-0191 1-6. 
La Varenne Pratique is worth every pen­
ny, but at half the price, Better H
ome
s and 
Gardens Complete Guide to Food and Cook­
ing is a thorough, practical reference. It of­
fers sound information on buying and stor­
ing ingredients, food preparation, cooking 
terms, tips, techniques, and recipe varia­
tions. While the book is arranged alpha­
betically like a glossary, the entries are 
quite extensive. Cross-references are giv­
en, but it isn't necessary to jump from entry 
to entry to grasp a topic. 
A two-page schematic called "What's 
In This Book" guides you through the 
book's main features, such as solutions to 
common cooking problems, how-to pho­
tos, nutritional information, charts, def­
initions, tips, quantity yields and conver­
sions, and cross-references. At the back, 
you'll find "Emergency Substitutions," 
and recipe and text indexes. 
A look at the "Fish" entry reveals in­
formation on species, selection, storing, 
cooking, and retail cuts. While there are 
no pictures, a comprehensive chart lists 
types of fish, flesh color, flavor, and 
species substitutions. Likewise, cooking 
methods are presented in a streamlined 
chart for both fresh and frozen fish. 
Want to tackle cooking kohlrabi? Five 
pages of clear, well-organized charts di­
vide "Cooking Fresh Vegetables" into the 
vegetable, quantity, preparation, and di­
rections for conventional and microwave 
cooking. Many entries include handy 
tips, such as "Plum Math," which divides 
pounds of plums into numbers of pieces 
of whole fruit, as well as cup measure­
ments for chopped and sliced plums. 
The Complete Guide is easy to use and 
informative-definitely a good resource 
to have on the kitchen shelf. 
Cooking A to Z, by the California Culi­
nary Academy. THE COLE GROUp, 1992. $24.95, 
SOFfCOVER; 63 1 PP. ISBN 1·56426-002-X. 
Billed as a practical, comprehensive 
culinary reference, Cooking A to Z deliv­
ers some good information-if you're 
willing to hunt for it. The book includes 
I guidelines for choosing ingredients and 
equipment, cooking terms, techniques, 
recipes, variations, and tips. The book is 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 75 ---
many other 5-star establishments serve only 
Illycafre. 
The reason: Illy delivers a round, pleasant 
taste-never bitter or burnt. It's good 
enough to drink without sugar. And ideal 
for making CAPPUCCINO and LAITE. 
Even makes wonderful coffee in a regular 
coffee machine! Subscribe by the month. 
Whole beans or ground. Regular or decaf. 
Special gift pkgs. 
FIRST CAN FREE! 
New members get the fi
st 
. ,_. 
can FREE when you join
. 
. 
(3-mth. min.). Cans are 
. 
". 
. 
8.8 oz. (makes 35 
" 
cups). Cost: $8.95 for 
. .' -. . . :,_ 
reg., $ 1 0.50 for decaf. 
.' 
1r CALL 
1-800-786-5656 
Lessons In 
Creative Cuisine 
"Cooking with Class" 
Announces New 
Class Schedule 
Heart of Pa. Mountains, 1 '12 
hrs. from Manhattan, minutes 
to Victorian Village of Milford, 
Pa. Co
mm
ercial Kitchen Studio, 
1000 Cookbook Research 
Library 
GUEST CHEF SERIES, 
DAY CLASSES, 
WEEK-LONG 
DESSERT FRENZY, 
THE BASICS 
Call1Write for Brochure 
Cooking w/Class 
2221 Twin Lakes Rd. 
Shohola, Pa. 18458 
717-296-6066 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
FEATURING A COMP
LETE 
SELECTION OF 
OVER 500 SPECIALlY FOOD ITEMS AND 
INGREDIENTS FROM AROUND THE WORLD. 
By SOliros, Inc. 
WE HAVE BEEN SERVICING THE FINEST 
REST
A
URANTS 
AND HOTELS IN CHICAGO 
FOR OVER 11 YEARS. NOW YOU CAN HAVE 
THIS SERVICE DELIVERED TO YOUR DOOR 
SEND $2.00 FORA CATALOG, 1 
YEAR 
SUBSCRIPTION AND $5.00 COUPON. 
SPECIALlY FOODS by Sotiros Inc. 
P.O. BOX 1913 
'-_________ -' BRIDGEVIEW, IL 60455 
THE WORLD'S MOST FAMOUS COOKING SCHOOL 
IS NOW IN SESSION IN YOUR KITCHEN 
THE VIDEOS 
Thanks to this remarkable senes of videos, now you can recreate the 
extraordinary cuisine of France nght in your kitchen-with the world­
renowned chefs of Le Cordon Bleu's famed teaching staff as your personal 
instructors. 
Duling the course of each exCiting, 45-minute video, you1l discover the 
secrets of Le Cordon Bleu's most coveted recipes ... watch some of France's 
foremost chefs prepare incredible culinary s
peciali
Ues ... and see close-up 
the classic techniques and practical methods you need to prepare a 
fabulous assortment of dishes from an elegant dinner for two to a 
memorable holiday feast. 
Whether you're a professional chef, a sertous amateur or looking for the 
perfect 
gift for you favonte cook, you1l find the videos-and the specialities 
you 1I Ieam to create-truly magnillqueJ 
SINGLE VIDEOS $24,95 ($3,00 SjH ea,) 
DISPLAY SET-8 TAPES + COOKBOOK 
$198.60 (5% shipping) 
CALL 800/888-4046 
THE COOKBOOK 
At last here's Le Cordon Bleu's first complete cookbook in English. 
Filled with color photos of cooking techniques and finished dishes, this 
578-page hardcover book gives you in-depth instruction in the art of 
traditional French cuisine-along with hundreds of recipes and easy-to­
follow menus. With its introduction by Le Cordon Bleu President, 
Andre Cointreau, Le Cordon B1eu at Home is destined to be the new 
classic on French cooking! 
"LE CORDON BLEU AT HOME" COOKBOOK 
A $44.95 value comes Free with this offer. 
CALL 800/888-4046 
LIMITED OFFER 
To receive complete 
Video Ubrary and 'Le Cordon 
Bleu at Home' Cookbook­
CALL TODAY 
$ 198%!l 
+ 5% shipping 
GYilfDWI 
75

--- Page 76 ---
REVIEWS 
organized alphabetically, so much of the 
information is easy to locate. But when 
you look under "P" for pastry, which 
would seem to be a logical entry, there's 
no such entry. A peek at the index lists 
"Pastry," then sends you stumbling 
through a maze of single-subject en­
tries-"Cream Puffs," "Pie," "Puff Pas­
try," "Tart," "Techniques," and "Tools." 
Similarly, "Vegetables" provides avail­
ability, selection, and preparation infor­
mation all in one location, but then dis­
patches you to individual entries of 
"Blanch," "Boil," "Braise," "Broil," "Grill," 
"Microwave Oven," "Parboil," "Puree," 
"Steam," and "Stir-Fry." In addition, the 
book neglects to tell you there's addition­
al data under individual vegetable entries, 
such as "Carrots" and "Fennel." 
Many of the tips scattered through 
the book are extremely valuable. For ex­
ample, the one discussing the done ness 
of meat is clear, concise, and realistic. In 
general, information on cooking equip­
ment is one of the book's strongest assets, 
including a fine section on knives and 
knife -sharpening methods. Cutting 
techniques are illustrated by a brief series 
of photographs. 
More photos-and more close-ups­
would make the book more effective for 
the novice cook. And while the book is 
brimming with recipes, the space would 
have been better used for more reference 
data and step-by-step instructions. Cook­
ing A to Z is a good reference, but a frus­
trating one. 
A Food Lover's T iptionary, by Sharon 
Tyler Herbst. MORROW, 1 994. $ 1 5, SOFfCOVER; 
373 PP 1SB 
0·688·12 146-2. 
Unlike the preceding books, Tip­
tionary is not illustrated, nor does it fea­
ture recipes. It is, however, a masterful 
tool bursting with cooking tidbits. Writ­
ten by Sharon Tyler Herbst, "Good 
Morning America's" culinary "tipster" 
and the award-winning author of six 
books, Tiptionary offers information on 
selection, cooking, storage, problem­
solving techniques, serving suggestions, 
and historical notes. 
When you've got more 
taste than time! 
76 
Find out why millions of PBS viewers (and their deliciously well 
fed families) are devoted to the gracious down-home cooking­
and the make-it-easy approach-of Nathalie Dupree. 
$19.00, now at your bookstore. 
• Clarksoll Potter/Publishers 
- The sigll of a beautiful gift 
A member of The Crown Publishing Group 
The book is arranged alphabetically, 
with entries bold-faced for quick finding. 
In addition to pronunciations of unusual 
words and useful cross-references, the 
book features handy charts with infor­
mation from volumes for common pan 
sizes to common food additives to stages 
of hardness for sugar syrups. 
Technical tips include how to cook at 
high altitudes, how to keep the fizz in 
sparkling wine, and how to cleanly split a 
cake layer using dental floss. 
Whether you're a novice or an experi­
enced cook in quest of kitchen savvy, I 
wholeheartedly recommend Tiptionary. 
Written in Herbst's clear and engaging 
style, the book is a sensible and satisfying 
reference. 
-Leslie Beal Bloom is the Past President 
of the International Association of Culinary 
Professionals, a freelance writer for The 
Washington Post and Simply Seafood 
magazine, and a consultant for the seafood 
industry. Summers find her kayaking in the 
chilly but bountiful Arctic waters in search 
of exotic seafood. • 
There is nothing hotter than ... 
"SCORN1ED 
WOMAN " 
Hot Sauce 
Scorned Woman is 
made from a secret 
combination of 
four peppers 
and spices creating a 
sensational taste. 
FANTASTIC 
EXPLODING FLAVOR 
for Buffalo Wings, 
Blackened Fish 
or the best of the best 
Bloody Mary. 
Packaged in a 
black felt bag $6.99 
or plain $5.99 
including shipping. 
Taste for Gourmet Gallery 
6289 W. Sample Rd., 
Coral Springs, FL 
33067 
call (800)-TASTEY 1 
827-8391 
VISA, MC, & DISCOVER 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 77 ---
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • • • • 
Cooking Software that 
Makes Sense! 
Let your Macintosh™ power through the "book 
• • • • • 
• work" of cooking. Zero in on recipes by ingredient • 
• • • • • 
and many other ways, plan meals, scale recipes 
and create shopping lists at the speed of thought. 
Acclaimed by Cookbook Review as "great 
culinary software!," Mangia! is unconditionally 
guaranteed to delight you. 
Mangia! runs on any modern Macintosh (without 
HyperCard™) and comes with over 300 recipes for 
• 
well under $50. 
• • • 
UP5TIll 
SOFTWA R E 
1 442A Walnut . Berkeley, CA • 94709 
• • • • • • • • • 
• 
Call 1 
c
-JOT-DOWN to order or leam more. 
• 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
NO MORE YOLKS . . . 
@ 
JUST WH ITESTM 
DEB-EL dried egg whites-the 
healthier substitute for whole eggs 
.I high in protein 
.I cholesterol-free 
.I fat-free 
.I no preservatives 
.I long shelf life 
.I all natural 
.I salmonella-free 
.I no additives 
.I sugar-free 
.I no refrigeration 
FOR BAKING & COOKING HEALTHY 
FOODS AND DESSERTS!!! 
2 8oz. boxes (whites of 8 % dz. eggs) 
$8.99 + $3.00 S & H 
Free Recipes with order • Send check or 
money order to: 
DEB-EL FOODS CORPORATION 
P.O. Box 876, Elizabeth, N. J., 07206 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
3·1/2 Quart Oval Ovens 
Cast iron absorbs heat quickly, distributes 
it evenly while retaining heat for 
maximum fuel efficiency. The Le Creuset 
3-1/2 quart oval oven is available in 
green, saffron, blue, white, creme or 
black. list 1 20. 
#C·2502·25 
$5900 
(111l(l(!J)Jȼ@«nl1' 
=
Ht-LOW SYSTEM 
a·Piece Cookware Set 
Hard anodized aluminum features hi·low non-stick cooking surface for easy food release 
and quick clean-up. Set includes: 1·1/2 and 3 quart covered saucepan, 8 quart covered 
stockpot and 1 0" open skillet with meat rack. Open stock value $347. 
#(.88508 
$22000 
BRRun 
5·ln·l Kitchen 
Machine A powerful 600 watt 
motor base with attachments for a 
food processor, mixer, blender, 
chopper and ice crusher · all in one 
convenience appliance! Includes 
universal chopping blade, blending 
blade, 4 slicing/shredding disc with 
storage tray, 2 whisks, dough hooks 
and 3 different processing bowls. 
Electronically cantrolled variable 
speed for optimal control. 
List $399's 
#E·Kl OOO Sale $249001 
C A L L T O L L F R E E 
( 
77

--- Page 78 ---
CALENDAR 
Sponsoring an event that you want readers to know 
about? Send an announc
emen
t to Calendar, Fine 
Cooking, PO BOx 5506, New
town, CT 06470· 
5506. Be sure to include dates, a complete address, 
and the phone number to call for more inf
orma
tion. 
The deadline for entries in the October/November 
issue is July 1. 
ARKANSAS 
Festival-38th Annual Bradley County Pink Toma· 
to Festival, June 9-1 1, Warren. Call 501/226·5225. 
CALIFORNIA 
Auction-14th Annual Napa Valley Wine Auc· 
tion, June 9-12, Meadowood Resort Hotel, St. He· 
lena. For information, call 800/358·5476, ext. 526. 
Seminars-Changing American Appetites: 
Mediterranean Inspirations, American Interpreta· 
tions, June 20-25, Hyatt Regency San Francisco. 
For information, call Oldways Preservation & Ex· 
change Trust, 617/695·9102. 
Festival-Gilroy Garlic Festival, July 29-3 1, Gilroy. 
For information, call 408/842.1625. 
Convention-American Culinary Federation 
National Convention, July 30 through August 3, 
San Francisco Hilron & Towers. Call 904/824·4468. 
COLORADO 
Classes-School of Natural Cookery, PO Box 
19466, Boulder, CO 80308·2466; 303/444·8068. 
July 1 5-17: A Cooking Weekend with Joanne 
Saltzman. Explore vegetarian cuisine at a Rocky 
Mountain retreat. 
FLORIDA 
Fair-9th Annual Southwest Florida Wine Fair, 
June 4-5, South Seas Plantation, Captiva Island. 
For information, call 800/237·3102. 
HAWAII 
Demonstrations-5th Annual Cuisines of the Sun, 
July 23-27, Mauna Lani Bay Hotel, Big Island. For 
information, call 800/367·2323. 
LOUISIANA 
Festival-3rd Annual New Orleans Wine and Food 
Experience, July 14-17. Call 504/522·5730. 
MICHIGAN 
Festival-National Cherry Festival, July 2-9, Tra· 
verse City. For information, call 6161947·4230. 
NEVADA 
Festival-3 1st National Basque Festival, July 1-3, 
Elko City Park. For information, call 702/738·7 135. 
NEW YORK 
Workshops-Cornell's Adult University, 626 
Thurston Ave., Ithaca, NY 14850; 607/255·6260. 
July 10-16: The Culinary Workshop on Wines, 
Breads, Grains, and Cheese. 
OREGON 
Classes-Western Culinary Institute, 1316 S.W 
13th Ave., Portland, OR 97201; 800/666·0312. 
Weekend Continuing Education courses June 
through August. 
PENNSYLVANIA 
Festival-Great Tastes of Pennsylvania: 4th Annu· 
al Wine and Food Festival, June 25-26, Resort at 
Split Rock, Lake Harmony. Call 800/255· 7625. 
TEXAS 
Festival-Black·Eyed Pea Jamboree, July 15-17, 
Athens. For information, call 903/675·5 181. 
VIRGINIA 
Festival-13th Annual Virginia Wineries Festival, 
June 4-5, Great Meadow Field Events Center, The 
Plains. Ca1l 800/277·CORK. 
78 
Readers of The Wine Advocate, 
The Wine Spectator, Bon Appetit, 
Food and Wine, or Wine and Spirits: 
If you read any of these magazines, then 
you need a FREE subscription to the 
IWA Gift Catalog 
Your ultimate source for glassware, decanters, 
corkscrews, wine racks, refrigerated wine storage 
units, and other exciting wine accouterments! 
CALL TODAY FOR YOUR 
FREE SUBSC
RIPTI
ON 
1-800-527-4072 
Ⱥeat Ȼean ňeet 
50% LESS FAT 
1HAN 
CmCKEN! 
COVINGTON RANCH BEEF, a South Dakota Company, 
introduces a totally trimmed, boneless beef, designed 
for the low calorie, low fat, low cholesterol diet you 
want for yourself and your family. Based on a 
naturally lean and tender breed of cattle, our beef is 
the most healthful choice in meats, yet lives up to the 
Midwestern tradition of quality. No fillers or 
chemicals are ever used in processing. 
NOW YOU CAN ENJOY THE SATISFYING 
TASTE 
OF REAL BEEF, AGAIN! 
COMPARE FOR YOURSELF: 
6-oz. scrving 
fat(gm) % of Cal 
Cholesterol calories 
from Fal 
(mg) 
Covington Ranch Tenderloin 3.0 
16% 
94 
Flounder 
2.6 
12% 
1 16 
Skinless Chicken Breast 
6.0 
19% 
144 
Ordinary Beef Tenderloin 
17.0 
43% 
142 
SOURCE:Covington Ranch QA data (rom USDA approved Green Meadows 
laboratory, Ft. CoUins, CO and USDA Ilandbooks8-;,8-13, 8-17. 
Try the new leader of healthy, lean beef. 
COVINGTON RANCH BEEF 
P.O. Box 601 
YANKTON, SOUTIl DAK011\. 57078 
CALL AND ORDER TODAY 
1-800-365-BEEF 
Visa/MC Welcome 
Call or Write for a Free Brochure 
VI DALIA® 
ONIONSI 
Hendrix Farms proudly presents this 
year's crop of Vidalia· Sweet Onions! 
168 
198 
280 
358 
Fresh from the field and hand selected, 
order your Vidalias· today and ask for 
a free copy of our spring catalog! 
1D-LB. BOX 
$12.95 
25-LB. BOX 
$29.95 
5O-LB. BOX 
$54.95 
(Plus $2.95 S&H per address) 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 79 ---
If you've ever wondered where to [md a special 
food . . . I f you love to read about unusual foods and 
the people who make them . . . Ifyou ' d like to try the 
rare ingredients used by outstanding chefs . . . 
You 'll want to subscribe to Mati Or{)er Gourmet. 
$18 per year includes 6 issues, a directory of outstanding 
foods available by mail and discount coupons worth $20. 
Call 1 -800-989-5996 for information. 
S
ʓ
IS 
Beringer Private Res Chardonnay '91 $13.99 
Beringer Knights Valley Cab '90 
$9.99 
Cakebread Chardonnay '92 
16.99 
Roben Mondavi Napa Cab '90 
1 1 .99 
Cuvaison Chardonnay '92 
10.99 
St. Clement Cab '90 
15.99 
Femrri Carrano Chardonnay '92 
1 5.99 
Dom Perignon '85 
69.99 
Taibon Chardonnay '91 
23.99 
Moet & Chandon White Srar 
1 8.99 
Sanford Chardonnay '91 
10.99 
Call our Toll Free Number 1 -800-723-WINE, 
to order wine and to join our Cellar Club or receive our Free Newsletter. 
SALT FREE · SUGAR FREE • ALL NATURAL 
NO FILLERS · NO MSG · NO PRESERVATIVES 
Benson's Gourmet Seasonings bring salt free cooking to new heights in taste. 
Our unique blends of herbs and spices, from the finest gardens around the 
world, are outstanding in quality. Give your food a full, more robust flavor the 
natural way. Treat your taste buds to our exciting blends: 
Supreme (110) 
Zesty (104) 
Garlic and Herb for poulty/porklvegetables 
Lemon Herb for fish/seafood/salads 
Calypso (107) 
Gusto (1 06) 
Jamaican hot and spicy 
Herb and Pepper for baking/broiling/BBO 
Masterpiece (112) 
Table Tasty (103) 
Southwestem for beef/ground meat 
Natural Salty Flavor for the table 
Gift Pack Assortment includes Recipe Booklet 
Ask about our Sportsmen's Collection 
JU E/JULY 1994 
BENSON'S GOURMET SEASONINGS 
PO Box 376 · Azusa CA 91702 
(800) 325-5619 · fax (818) 969-291 2 
Food & Wine News Thai's Reallv Dlllerenl! 
Innovative chefs, regional surprises, excellent food and wine pairings, food lore, 
food fairs and much morel 
We're at the forefront of the 'Focus of the Nineties: REGIONAL American 
Cuisine.' Give us a taste test I 
Send for FREE information today. Only $16 for ten issues. Please wrDe to: 
Food Worth Celebrating, Inc. 
P.O. Box 1155, Huntington NY 11743 
Professional 
Training 
· Accelerated A.O.S. Degree 
· Small Classes 
· Continuing Education 
f&COltroa1e 
CALL 
I 
(602) 990-3773 
Cu inary 
(800) 848-2433 
lnsLiluLe 
Scottsdale, Arizona 
L O V E T o C O O K ? 
Start your own proven and profitable 
Home Based Service Business utilizing your 
Creative Cooking a bilities. Learn how to start and 
operate a successful Personal Chef Service business 
from the originator and pioneer of the 
Personal Chef Service industry-the USPCA. 
Our Personal Chef Service Business Training System 
includes: 
'STARTER RECIPES 
'FORMS AND CONTRACTS 
• TRAINING MANUAL 
'MARKETING MATERIALS 
'COMPUTER SOFTWARE 
'ONE YEAR TELEPHONE SUPPORT 
CALL FOR YOUR FREE INFORMATION PACKAGE! 
M/C 
1 -800-547 -791 5 
UNITED STATES PERSONAL CHEF ASSOCIATION 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
Listed in Entrepreneur Magazine's 
1993 Business Opportunity Top 500. 
VISA 
79

--- Page 80 ---
F LAVO RINGS 
Worcestershire 
Sauce 
Worcestershire sauce is a dark-brown, 
spicy-tangy elixir that has a long and 
murky history. Some theories say the 
"original" Worcestershire (pronounced 
woos-ter-sheer) came from ancient 
Rome. Supposedly, Worcestershire de­
scended from the Romans' garum, a pop­
ular condiment in which rotted fish was a 
primary ingredient. 
According to legend, however, the 
sauce's discovery was a happy accident. 
In the early 1830s, Lord Marcus Sandys 
walked into the Lea & Perrins chemist 
shop in Worcester, England, and re­
quested that a sauce be made from a 
recipe he'd received in India. The 
chemists made the sauce and found it 
tasted terrible. They put the sauce in jars 
and left them in the the cellar, where the 
sauce was forgotten for several years. 
When the jars were rediscovered, some 
brave soul sampled the contents. The 
aged concoction was delicious. Lea & 
Perrins began bottling and selling the 
creation soon thereafter, and the exact 
recipe remains its closely guarded secret. 
Worcestershire maintains its popular­
ity with a flavor that's difficult to dupli­
cate. Its unique taste-simultaneously 
sweet, salty, and savory--comes from a 
long-aged and unusual combination of 
vinegar, molasses, tamarind (a tart fruit 
native to India), shallots, garlic, cloves, 
onions, chili peppers, and anchovies. 
However Worcestershire works its 
alchemy, it's effective. People seem to use 
it in and on everything. It brightens the 
flavor of hearty soups and stews, has be­
come a near-standard addition to meat­
loaf and hamburgers, and it's vital to the 
creation of Caesar salad and steak tartare. 
My dad, who inspired me to be a chef, 
loved Worcestershire. He was a novice 
cook who liked to recreate dishes he had 
eaten in restaurants while entertaining 
clients. Since we lived near the coast, 
seafood was a common highlight, and a 
bottle of Worcester shire was always near­
by. I remember how careful he was to add 
just the right touch of Worcester shire to 
cocktail sauce for raw oysters. He always 
80 
Worcestershire sauce is packed with lots of 
ingredients, including chili peppers, molasses, 
tamarind, onions, shallots, vinegar, garlic, 
and anchovies. 
went a little overboard when he used it in 
New Orleans-style barbecue shrimp. 
It wasn't until many years later, when a 
friend and I decided to open a chop 
house, that I ever considered making a 
near-scratch version of Worcestershire. 
I thought the flavor of Worcester shire was 
too unique to fully recreate, but I wanted 
to enhance it using many of the ingredi­
ents that create the mysterious blend. 
After a good deal of trial and error, 
I think the final result satisfies my goal. In 
my kitchen, this sauce is inspiration; my 
chefs and I find ourselves creating more 
and more dishes in which to use it. Some 
customers like to pour it on prime beef, 
but my most popular menu item is an ap­
petizer of warm, grilled, Worcestershire­
drizzled portobello mushrooms. 
Here's my recipe for enhanced 
Worcestershire. The only ingredient 
that may be difficult to find is fresh 
horseradish, but it's often available in 
the specialty section of produce depart­
ments. Make sure you choose the firmest 
possible horseradish. 
CHAMBERLAIN'S ENHANCED 
WORCESTERSHIRE SAUCE 
Yields 4 cups. 
3 oz. fresh horseradish, peeled and chopped 
rough (about 3,!., cup) 
7 large onion (about l-2 /b.), chopped 
7 tsp. olive oil 
7 tsp. seeded and chopped jalapeno 
3 Tbs. roughly chopped garlic 
l-2 tsp. black pepper 
7 oz. anchovies (about l!., cup) 
Pinch ground cloves 
7 l-2 tsp. salt 
7 Tbs. lemon juice 
7 cup water 
7 cup Worcestershire sauce 
l-2 cup molasses 
l!., cup honey 
7 cup white-wine vinegar 
In a large stockpot, saute the horseradish and 
onion in the olive oil over medium-high heat 
for 4 to 6 min., or until the ingredients begin 
to caramelize. (If you have a hood over your 
stove, you may want to turn on the fan to 
disperse the horseradish fumes.) Add the 
remaining ingredients and simmer for 1 to 
1 V2 hours, or until the flavors meld. Strain 
and cool the sauce. The enhanced Worcester­
shire sauce keeps well in the refrigerator for 
at least 6 months. 
Richard Chamberlain uses 20 gallons of 
his Worcestershire sauce each week at his 
restaurant, Chamberlain's Prime Chop 
House, in Dallas, Texas . • 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 81 ---
THE GREAT SOUTHWEST 
SPICE COMPANY® 
V 
Our All Natural Southwest 
Products Capture The True Flavor 
Of The "Great Southwest." 
The tastes of the Southwest are as diverse as its 
people. The Great Southwest Spice Company 
offers three products for your culinary 
explorations into this great land. Our Chili 
Seasoning allows you to create your own 
variations on dassic dishes such as chili, 
spicy fried rice, enchiladas and fajitas. 
Our BBQ Pit Rub will lend a hot Texas kick 
to your barbecue dishes, ond our 
Sweet·n·Smokey Marinade will send your taste 
buds on a real spiritual journey! 
For dealer inquiries and re<ipe ideas contact: 
Chef Randy Skinner 
The Great Southwest Spice Company 
P.O. Box 914 
Franklin, Tennessee 37065 
You WON'T FIND 
THIS GREAT CHARDONNAY 
ANYwH
ERE ELSE! 
Continuing in Windsor's award.winning 
tradition, our recently released 1992 Preston Ranch 
Chardonnay is available exclusively from the 
winery ... for just $96 a case. Order today and we'll 
deliver to your home or office. Satisfaction guaranteed. 
$10 INTRODUCTORY OFFER 
As an introduction to Windsor's PrestOn 
Ranch Chardonnay, order one bottle - one time 
only - for only $10. 
In 1993, our winemaker received [he Andre 
Tschelistcheff "Winemaker of the Year" award from 
Bon Appetit magazine. One taste of this classic 
Chardonnay and you'll understand why. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
TO ORDER, CALL 
800-333-9987 
OFFER EXPIRES 4/30/94 
CA, NY. 11.. FL AND OR 
RESIDENTS ONLY. 
p ••••••••••• 
• 
IF UFE 
• 
• 
HAN
DS 
• 
: 
YOU 
: 
• A 
LEM
ON, • 
• 
MAKE
A
 
• 
: 
SOUFFLE. 
: 
• 
Sometimes the best way to get 
• 
• 
ahead is to go back. To school. 
Our unique. 2 year program offers: • 
• • Hands-on culinary training 
• 
• • 7 to 1 student/teacher ratio 
• 
• Paid. personalized internships 
• • Finandal aid for qualified students • 
• • Advanced Placement available 
• 
• 
• A.O.S. degree in Culinary Arts 
• 
• NEW: Bachelor's degree program in 
• 
Service and Management 
• 
• • • • • • • 
250 Main St.. Dept. FC • 
Montpelier. vr 05602·9720 
• 
Telephone (802) 223-6324 • 
•••••••••••• 
Accredited Member, ACCSCT 
fJfu. dlntUjUL c:A1a!1 
c1fnd (!wwn c:RE,Êtau'tant 
dmokd Catft4, YJau' 
The Perfect Gourmet Gift! It's 
Uniquely Mississippi! 
ctuÊw CatfoÊh 
A NEW cookbook of exciting and 
unusual catfish recipes from this 
gourmet restaurant in the 
Mississippi Delta-
Hard cover that opens Oat $14.95 
lOu'L qjoU'Lmd [i>-u; dlt(ixu a'Ll!; 
'JaSulotu! 
Call to order or receive our brochure 
1-800-833-7731 
P.o. Box 540, Indianola, MS 38751 
FAX: 601-887-5547 
====SEAFOOD 
=
'
.,1, ••. 
Satisfy your family's seafood needs 
throughout 
the 
year 
with 
quality 
seafood from Alaska delivered directly 
to your home! 
Fresh frozen salmon, 
halibut, 
crab. 
smoked seafood 
and 
much 
more. 
Call 
for 
our FREE 
CATALOG and \0% discount coupon 
for "Fine Cooking" readers. 
Special Introductory Offer 
Save 25% 
Canned Chinook Salmon 
"A Rare and Delicious Treat Not 
Found in Most Grocery Stores" 
12 - 7 112 oz. Cans ... $22.95* 
Plus Free 12 Page Recipe Booklet 
(*Plus $6.65 for shippinglhandling) 
Visa/MC Accepted 
CALL TOLL FREE 
1-800-732-1836 
81

--- Page 82 ---
COOK'S MARKET 
brb cre 
Healthy eallng doesn't have 
-It 
I 
I 
to be bonng! 
n 
Use Herb 'n' Lore spice blends 
. 
for a gourmet touch. 
.: c.a<w,<!.ptoe଻ 
. ury Spice .Blends cf 
C",,\lf\ dian. ltolwn . . 'vfexican. p. 4 
lି 
re", 
Q", 
Gୀi\l'" 
,.tslon. Middle taStel> 
('1 c 
ost 
'I, & 
Q .... 
Љ. 
\\"'Ѝ 
(.I .... ା -&-
rJ ޥy 
:.:s--$. ଼
 
$ .ȸ 
Herb Inl Lore 
) .§ 
ޤ 
1 1 Nadine Court .$ 
Thousand Oaks, CA. 9 1320 
(805) 499-7505 
For FREE catalogs send LSASE 
L.. 
ȵtȹ .. 1.j ££'0% 
_ 
[i:!;:\: 
ଽ 
eA LOUISE'S FAMOUS CARROT CAKE 
& CllEESE
CAKE!! eA 
170 Easy Recipes ' Free Recipe List w/SASE' (916) 722-ୁ058 
6937F I.e"'avre . CilnIS HeighlS . CA 95621 . Satisfaclion Guaranteed 
HANDMADE CLAY WINE BOTTLE HOLDER 
Original design by Alabama potter. Clay's 
natural insulating quality keeps boule cool 
longer without ice. Decorative for counter, bar. 
.c/I'Ifbf. 
or tabletop use. Choice of terraqcotla or white 
stoneware, both decorated with purple grapes. 
Send check or money order for $21.95 ($19.95 
plus $2.00 S&H) and slate color choice to: 
LYNN KONING 
P.O. BOX 56 
PINCKARD, AL 3637 1 
(205) 983-4804 
'
ЏIl
"UI",j LAKE WILD RICE 
BEST CELLAR 
Free-standing and slackable, c<lch hardwood and brass 
section holds a dozen wine bottles. Classic design fits any 
decor. WINE GLASS RACK holds 8 glasses. Slacks on 
BEST CELLAR or slands free. Fully assembled. 
i. 
BEST CELLAR 
$42.95 
GLASS RACK 
$27.00 
Set of one each 
$64.95 
Shipping included 
L--=-______ ^..::J TN Res add 8.25% Tax 
S 
őNQ;Œœ 
S 
5597 Beech Hill Rd .• Pegram. T 37143 
Wrile or place your order by phone: 1-800-374-1011 
VISAIMC/CHECK 
Cook. Eat. Have Fun 
LuCr
ativen_ 
The Connection 
_ 
82 
P.O. Box 16225 Dept. FC BIz' 
N. Hollywood, CA 91615 
• 
Discover 
.... 
small-batch 
I 
-
roasled quality. 
-
.-. 
We use only = 
the finest beans "-' 
from around the 
I 
world, and roast ȶ 
and ship daily. == 
ޣ 
Cal loday 
.... 
lUlilnW() 
IfIII 
for your FREE 
ЊЋ .. 
(ʏ(nðIðEE 
calalog. 
ȷ 
଺ 
IIOAS'I'ERS 
.., 
1·800·ARMENO· 1 
I 
1:1'1) 
(I ·800·276·3661) .... 
Have a Hot Attack! 
Je:;;rsa 
Flown Fresh from the Caribbean 
Gourmet Gift Baskets containing the 
world's hottest and most flavorfu l chile 
peppers, sauces and unique recipes . 
To order Gift Baskets or a FREE Catalog 
and Newsletter call 
1-800-522-3227 
Jabeba House · Box 482 • Hollis, NH 03049 
UNLEASH THE F 
R! 
MRS. DOG'S 
JAMAICAN 
JERK ... WITH 
SCOTCH BON­
NET PEPPERS. 
ENJOYTHE 
TASTE AND 
MAGIC OF 
JAMAICA! 
MRS. DOG'S PRODUCTS É 
(616) 454-1677 FAX 774-019J JrJf 
Traditional Native Barbecued Salmon 
is only one of the 42 low-fat recipes 
especially created for 
THE LIGHT GOU
RME
T 
Healthy Cooking School 
Video Series 
Each program $29.95 
6-Program Series (with recipe book) $195 
Call or write for FREE BROCHURE 
SUNCOAST MEDIA, INC. 
2938 West Bay Dr., Suite B 
Belleair Bluffs, FL 34640 
1-(800) 899-1 008 
_ 
_ 
DELICIOUS GRAIN FED BEEF 
'.M Traceable from our 
ebraska Farm to Your 
,b,. 
Door. USDA Inspecled, Naturally-Aged 
Steaks, Roasts & Lean Ground Beef. Each ީ.
 Tender Portion Individually Hand-Trimmed, 
• Boneless, Vacuum Packed, Flash Frozen, 
.
, 
Labelled & 
umbered. Mc/visa. 
. 
, 
Free Brochure CALL 1-800-871 -6328. 
Great Plains Meats, Wisner, Nebraska. 
P.o. Box 26191 • Shawnee Mission, KS 66225 
An elegant & easy dining solution. Our 
crabcakes started It all. Made by hand 
using the finest Chesapeake Bay 
Crabmeat. All you do Is heat & serve. 
Enjoy an Eastern Shore Tradltlonl 
• Fresh, shucked Oysters 
• Soft-shell Crabs . Shad & Shad Roe 
• Gift Packages & Certificates 
• Cookbooks · Aged Vir
gini
a Hams 
Please send mŇ:!..ur free brochure 
ʎ
4a
 
'EKpr@ss'Ltd.-
Route 1, Box 38 • Centreville. MD . 21617 
800-282-C
RAB 
NEW COOKBOOK 
International 
LIGHT CmSINE 
France • Italy . Greece . Spain • All American 
Conopkte Nul7iti6ltal B
reaJuIow
". 
WW FAT • WW CHOLESTEROL 
*2495 Free Gift 
tr::t\
(
,
 
(ph.MI) with Purchase ȴ 
Call today for our free newsletter 
1-800-274-8585 • Dept FCM 
GemServ Publishing Group 
i" "iii •• "iiiOiiii"i; iiciii"d 
• Home Study 
program 
l
eaches selection
, 
preparalion, seMng a 
_. ,/ • 
: appetimg and nutritious foods. Experts leach you how. Great 
- " 
• 
• recipes too' Oiptoma Awarded. FREE brochure. No 
salesman. ' .
' 
• 
• UIrioooc...1doook Name 
• 
• .. FT08Xl 
Age -- • 
• 101 KcrriYe Sn.t Address 
I 
:AIdofooj,. 11403 0Iy 
Slale_Zip __ : 
•• 0 lend. (odiog "ЌIu" 01 iolool, """ ill. or: (dod _"'1 0 
s.Mng,/1lIs5l1lliog 
• 
OOal i,.. Oflarisloy O
s.a_
 
OBaal..,;rg OlMdscllPi'l OSmol .... ' _ • 
1ij"." ,"'U""jJJ,,;ltu'''I''''U·W,mM!''''''. 
FINE COOKI G

--- Page 83 ---
WILD RICE 
Minn
esota No. 1 Long Grain 
56.00 per lb. Sib. minimum 
UPS prepaid. 251bs. S5.50 per 
lib. UPS prepaid. Gift packagmg 
information on request, same 
basic prices. Recipes included. 
Flourn Wild Rice 
Box 44T 
Blackduck, MN 56630 
or call 218-835-6667 
Did your fork run away 
with a spoon?TM 
We match 
STERLING SILVER 
SILVERPLATE 
STAINLESS 
call or write for a FREE 
price list of your pattern 
WILMA SAXTON, INC. 
37 Clementon Rd., Box 395 
Berlin, NJ 08009 
_ ʉ 609-767-8640 FAX 609-768-7795 
Mon. - Fri. 1 0AM - 6PM E.S.T. 
.. MAIL & PHONE ORDERS WELCOME 
Hagerty Silver Products 
BUY 
N.J. RESIDENTS ADD 6% SALES TAX. SELL 
Cuisine- De France, Sabatier" 
8" Cook's Knife $M $49 
(800) 859-6994 
Professional Cutlery Direct 
PCO De t FC144 170 Boston Post Rd, Sle. 13S Madison CT 06443 
,7:;> ;:ହ 
chesapeÆ2'ShÇS::Èrmct 
ȫȬ"1_. 
Enjoy the succulent\iaste cD "Chesapeake Bay 
Country's" finest seafood: gourmet crab cakes, crab 
imperial, crab quiche, and other selected handmade 
seafood products. Brochure available. Write or place 
your order by phone. 
CHESAPEAKE BAY GOURMET 
p.o. Box 456 
Chesler, MD 21619 
Visa and MaslerCard accepled . 1 -800-432-CRAB 
- NEW SIXTH EDITION -
1994 
THE GUIDE TO 
COOKING 
SCHOOLS 
Cookiog Schools, Cou"",s, 
V4C4tioJJS, Apprenfl'uships 
and Wille 11lstrvctiOll 
17t'01Ignout 1M Wotld 
SHAWGUlDES 
• 326 PAGES -
You'll find it in 
this comprehensive 
resource to over 
700 career and 
vacation programs 
worldwide. 
Recommended by 
Bon Appetil, Gourmet, 
The New York Times 
Just $22.95 ppd. 
ShawGuides, Box 1 295 
NY, NY1 0023 
Credit cards call: 
(800) 247-6553 or 
Fax 
281 -6883 
Who's shopping the Cook's Market? People who 
love cooking and food ! They're buying specialty 
foods, kitchen tools, table accessories, books and 
videos, classes to hone their skills-anything that 
adds to their pleasure in preparing, serving and 
eating good food. To reserve a space for your 
product, call the Fine Cooking Advertising 
Department, 1·800.283·7252. 
JUNE/JULY 1994 
A Catalog of Delights from the Sunny South 
... Original sauces, marinades, specialty food items 
and decorative home accessories. 
Featuring unique North Carolina products. 
Call or Write for Free Catalog 
Magnolia Products 
P.O. Box 1497, Da\;c!son, North Carolina 28036 
1-800-259-1158 
BEE SKEP HERBARY, INC 
• Herb Vinegars, Dressings 
• Mustards 
• Herbal Honey 
- Cookbooks 
• Bulk Herbs/Spices 
sold by the ounce 
..... ioOb-.,;:...ଷ ..... - Gift Baskets, Bath and 
catalog $1 refundable 
(215) 794-5160 
Peddler's Village 
P.O. Box 1 46 
Lahaska, PA 18931 
Beauty Products 
ecrabʊ 
IȭÂȮȯ_Ȱȱ'®ȲÂȳI 
"¢., 
v..l 
,,ସ 
or 
1;.d;tion.oI .0< 
Tastes and Traditions 
of the Chesapeake Bay! 
Seafood Seasonings • Clam Sauces 
Littleneck Clams • Soft Shell Crabs 
Gift Baskets and Crates 
FREE COLOR CATALOG 
Blue Crab Bay Company, Inc. 
PO Box 180 . Onancock, VA 23417 
1-800-221-2722 
'ޢ' 
NolV Available 
__ P':"oo",., Ј, 
·liC.aŅI LE CORDON BLED 
,,ʋʌʍ... . 
COFFEES 
'W-
Unrivaled for Richness 
JIIIII 
Slow Roasted/Deep Flavor 
Sampler Pack Includes 
1 can each of Mocha, Colombia .. & Decaf 
(Brazilia1t can be substituted). Included is a tin 
of the delicious Le Cordo .. Blm butter cookies. 
These galettes are made with 25% butter. The 
famed cookies have received rave reviews. 
The sampler pack with reorder forms is $50.00. 
($6. 00 shippi .. g). 
(800) 888-4046 
COOK'S MARKET 
ņafiaraja Spice Land 
Y lijl'l Z 
Prepare exotic fat free Indi
anJP
akistani 
dishes at home. Order an authentic spice 
kit containing a variety of eight imported 
Indian Spices and receive copies of easy 
to cook original recipes free. Spice kit 
$19.95 plus $5 first class shipping and 
handling. Any inquiries, please call. 
'MaFiaroja Spice Lana 
18627 (]3roo'<.fmrst St., Suite 322 
'Fountain 'Valley, CII 92708 
1-800-240-0112 
POCKET COOKBOOK STAND 
Amazing new cookbook stand holds 
large books yet folds to checkbook 
size for easy storage in a drawer or 
BOOK 
HOOK 
cabinet. Sleek design has rounded 
edges and is made of sturdy ABS 
plastic. Send $9.95 to: 
DAYUGHT 
ENTERPRI
SES, INc. 
P.o. Box 500. Greendale. WI, 53129 
HAZELNUTS 
Premium quality 
shelled hazelnuts. 
~ 
No chemical fertilizers 
or insecticides. 
5 1bs for $24.95 (includes UPS shipping) 
Send check or money order to: 
FARMINGTON FILBERTS 
PO Box 424, HILLSBORO, OR 97123 • 503-648-6578 
Other quantifies avnilable 
Å fJÄ!lÃÂar2.ÁÀh:¿' 
\i;f/ Almond,Onion or Mushroom 
3-Soz.JarSamplerPack$II.OOS&H prepaid 
VISA / Me 
1-800-327-2572 
EI Rancho 3322 Fowler Sr. Los An cles CA 90063 
Virgin Cold-Pressed 
Peanut Oil 
Sampler 
2-12 oz. Bottles 
$9.95 
1et order ehipped free 
Nuts DtVine 
p.o. Box 589 
Edenton, NC 27932 
1-800-334-0492 
FLAIR WITH FOOD! 
Our catering companion guidebook system designed 
exclusively for you! Start your own catering company 
with our proven business basics and culinary 
guidance. CALL TODAY for introductory presentation: 
FABULOUS FEASTS, INC. (216) 256-2609 
83

--- Page 84 ---
COOK'S MARKET 
Atiu Coffee 
The rare and exotic gourmet 
sensation from the South Pacific. 
17.6 oz. bag $ 12.95 plus S & H: $3.50 1st 
bag, $ 1.00 each additional bag. Whole 
beans only. Amex accepted. 
An exclusive of: J. Patrick Sales 
P.o. Box 43175 
Upper Montclair 
ew Jersey 07043 
1-800-792-2262 
-
rIȪ4-
ȩ 
, • G,o,_ ,;_'" . " ..
.... 
• Gourmet Mustards - 7 varieties 
• Salsas - Herb Blends - Tart Cherry Rice Pilaf 
Our own recipes, made with herbs we grow! 
Perfect for lo-cal or lo-fat diets. 
Call or write for FREE CATALOG 
4603 Berkshire · Detroit, MI 48224 
(313) 882-2222 ' MCNISAIDISC 
REAL EUROPEAN CHOCOLATE IN 
ATIRAcnVE REUSABLE ACRYLIC CANISTERS 
Your choice of: SemଶSWeet or WMe C
hocolate 
Chips 
12oz/S1200'l\1b/S1800' 2\1lb/S22.00 
Ground Chocolate 
ł. 
9oz/S9.00. Poslpaଵ. 
-
Free 
Simnertine 
RЇ 
Check/Mo: JOSEY B. (U.S.A.) CORPORATION 
େ'--'T"= 
POB 26301, #501, Sal Jose, CA9515iHi301 
Ń=ń#;:\
%' ec.\o\ty HOI) 
.. 
,,"I 0' OJ:, 
Direct from Provence, France 
You've never tasted honeys like these! 
Varieties Include lavender, Rosemary, 
Provence WIld Flower and other regional 
favorites. 100% Grade A - sold in only 
the finest gourmet shops of France. 
can, Write or Fox: 
Trillium 
International 
310 Wilow Lane - Dept, 1F 
New 
HoIand. 
PA 17!i57 
17171 3544503 
Fax: 17171355-9330 
UPS Doily 
Wholesale Welc
ome 
• Olympic Award Winning Chef-Instructors 
• American Culinary Federation Accredited 
18-Month Degree Program in both Culinary Arts 
and Pastry Arts ' Student Apartments 
• Financial Aid • Lifetime Worldwide Placement 
Sullivan College 
3101 Bardstown Road • Louisville, KY 40205 
1-800-844-1354 
84 
PIQUANT Pf:PPf:R 
Specializing in 
Hot & Spicy Food Items 
Over 256 captivating selections 
for your enjoyment. 
freeCatatog 800-931-7474 
P.o. Box 20 1 96FC, Wichita, lIS 67208-1196 
CULINARY 
INSTITUTE 
WEmRN ClA.INARY INSTInITE 
1 3 1 6 SW 1 3th Avenue 
P
onIond.
 
OR 9nOI 
(503) 223-2215 0<' (
800) 
666-0312 
Professional chef training and culinary art pro­
gram Intensive I 2-month program based on the 
principals of Escoff.,.-with emphasis on 
mode
m
 
techniques. Financial aid available for those who 
qualify, and VA approved. 
Call or ..nee CDday for more information 
and catalog. 
HeMt4JMtt HOME STYLE BREAD MIXES 
BREAD MIXES: Buttermilk, 
ALSO TASTY MIXES: 
Whole Whea, Rye, Italian, 
Biscuits, Muffins, Pancake5, 
Salt Rising, Black Rye. 
Doughnuts, Cake5, Cookie5. 
12 or 24 OL packages' No Artificial Pneservatives 
For catalog call HeartyMix (908) 382-3010 
1231 Madison Hill Rd., Rahwa ,NJ 07065 
BUY OVER 40 GOURMET 
OESSERT MIXES FACTORY DIRECT 
TUVb." WX 
Italian Dessert Lovers Special 
5 bags Tiramisu Mix, 5 doz. Italian imported 
ladyfingers, Plus Espresso Coffee. All for only $18.75 
: , . 'l . . , 
" 
FLAVOR YOUR FOODS 
LIKE A PROFESSIONAL 
 
Create stocks for soups, sauces, casseroles, 
dips, dressings, etc. Redi-Base available 
in Chicken, Beef, Vegetable, Seafood, 
Turkey, & Ham. Easy to use. Free "Idea 
Book" including hundreds of recipes. 
Choose four 8 oz. containers for $29.95. 
Less than 3 cents per prepared ounce. 
Order by credit card: 1-800-872-8823 
or for information 1-800-820-5121. 
GREAT FOOD-GREAT 
WEAL
TH 
Do you have an appetite for success? 
଴\ Love gourmet food? 
cot\ THE GO
URME
T CLUB 
1219 Waterbury, Lutz, FL 33549 
81)-949-1244 
I 
Melissa's by Mail 
G O U R M ET P R O D U C E 
If you love good food, but have 
limited time to search for 
special ingredients, Melissa's 
by Mail can help. Our FREE 
Catalog features herbs, spices 
and exotic produce from around 
the world. If real Honeycomb, 
Dried Cranberries, Sweet 
Dumpling Squash, Tabbouleh, 
Fresh Chiles, and Macadamia 
Nuts sound good to you, CAll 
US! We're your one-stop 
source for over 500 items! 
Ask for the Mail Order Dept. 
1-800-588-0151 
World Variety Pr
oduce
, Inc., P.O. Box 21127, L.A., CA 90021 
48,000 Patterns China 
Crystal & Flatware 
Obsolete, Inactive And Active_ 
Buy or Sell. 
REPlACEME
NTS, LID, 
1089 Knox Rd . • PO Box 26029 
Greensboro, NC 27420 - Dept. FK64B 
1-800-562-4462 
For Connoisseurs 
of Coffee & Teas 
More than 170 of the world's finest, 
most exotic coffees and teas shipped 
fresh to your door. Call today for 
our free brochure. 
GEORGETOWN 
COFFEE. TEA 
& SPICE 
1330 WISConsin Ave., NW . 
"'''ashington, DC 20007 
1-800-846-1947 
THE KNIFE 
YOU'LL REACH FOR 
CERAMIC ZIRCONIA BLADE 
MAKES CUTTING SILKY SMOOTH 
• Diamond-hard white Kyocera blade · Sharper 
than any steel edge · Lightweight and perfectly 
balanced · Stays razor sharp - never needs 
sharpening · One-year factory warranty 
• The ideal gift for the serious cook · 
5" All-Purpose Slicer $59ޡ + $5 shp, 
Order now from: ShawGuides 
Box 1 295, New York NY 1 0023 
Credit cards: (800) 247-6553 or Fax (419) 281-6883 
FINE COOKING

--- Page 85 ---
I)ONAI)Il In.!l(ʈK 1)1l1)1)1l1l 
All natural Ponape Black Pepper 
now available in the U.S. 
From the lush rain forests of Ponape Island in 
Micronesia comes the world's most flavorful 
pepper-Ponape Black-long regarded as one 
of the world's most sought after spices. 
5 oz. gift bottle-$12. plus $4.50 slh 
3 oz. package-$5. plus $3.50 slh 
One of each-$16. plus $4.50 slh 
To order, or for more information, 
call ISLAND TRADERS at 
1·800·9Ponape (976·6273) 
4637 Q St., NW, Washington, DC 20007 
A Coffee Lover's Dream 
Now!! You can enjoy the luxury of the 
World's Finest Gourmet Coffees carefully 
chosen from a different roaster delivered 
to your door each and every month. 
Receive 2 pounds 0 more of the selected 
roaster's coffee for as low as $8.50 per 
pound }lJus shr-pping and handling. 
Along with your coffee, you'll receivE<, a 
newsl tter detailing the heritage 0 the 
featured roaster and their coffees as well 
as gourmet coffee recipes and ideas. 
Old ଳorld Coffee Traders 
The Coffe Of The Month Club 
To order or for more information call 
1·800·4·€-I:.UBJAVA · 1·800-425-8252 
FREE COOKBOOK CATALOG 
American Regional Cuisine. 
Hundreds of community, Jr. League & regional cookbooks, 
many hard to find. Everything from dowll'home to gourmet, 
for novice & seasoned cooks alike! Write: 
lion House . Box 91 283-Dept. DK • PiHsbur h, PA 1 5221 
Action Inc. 75, 83 
AGA Cookers 7 
All-Clad Metaicrafters 
Alos 5 
America State By State 8 
American Spoon Foods 1 7 
Antq. Mall, Crown Rest. 8 1 
Arden's Gardens 84 
Armeno Coffee 82 
Atiu Coffee 84 
Beer Across America 18 
Bee Skep Herbaty 83 
Benson's Seasonings 79 
Bertolli 14, 1 5 
Blue Crab Bay Co. 83 
Borden 1 9 
California Wine makers 
Cambridge Culinary 78 
Cant. Crack & Peel 70 
Chef 
wear 9 
Chesapeake Bay 83 
Chesapeake Express 82 
Clarkson N. Potter 76 
Classic Steak 8 1 
CompuChef Ine. 7 1 
Cooking With Class 75 
JU E/JULY 1994 
Covington Ranch Beef 78 
Culinary Inst. LA 1 8 
Daylight Ent. 83 
Deb-El Foods Corp. 77 
Deinhard Wines 87 
Direct Wines 7 1 
Don Alfonso Foods 7 1 
Duhnke Furniture 82 
EI Rancho Prod. 83 
Fabulous Feasts 83 
Farmington Filberts 83 
Filippo Berio 73 
Five-Star Espresso 75 
Flash in the Pan 70 
Floura Wild Rice 83 
Food Worth Celeb. 79 
GemServ Pub. 82 
Georgetown Coffee 84 
Gourmet Club 84 
Great Plains Meats 82 
Great SW Spice 8 1 
Heartymix 84 
Hendrix Farms 78 
Herb 'N' Lore 82 
Hilyard & Hilquist 1 7 
Indps. CuI. Inst. 70 
For FREE Cookbook Information 
1 -800-445 -66 21 , ext 9706 
Cookbooks by Morris Press 
321 2 E. Hwy 30 • Kearney, NE 68847 
CLASSIFIEDS 
CIASSIFlEDS: $4.50/word, min/15 words, pa
ymen
t 
w/order. Fine Cooking Adv., Box 5506, N
ewrown
, CT 
06470-5506. August/Sept. deadline May 17,1994. 
BLACK WALNUT AND CHERRY Coffee Scoops 
and Salad Serving Sets. Duflo Woodcrafts, Rt. I, Box 
277, St. Joe, AR 72675. (501 ) 449-6412. 
DELICIOUS VIDALlA® SWEET ONIONS. Certi­
fied and Guaranteed. Free brochure. The Georgia 
Gourmet, PO Box 40 I-A, Cobbtown, GA 30402. (800) 
62-0NION. 
FREE GOURMET SAMPLER - Coffee, Tea, Preserves. 
Send $5 for postage and handling to: Treasure Classics, 
Box 390, Cochran, GA 3 1014. 
LEARN HEALTHY NUTRITIOUS COOKING at 
home. Selection, preparation, serving of appetizing, nu­
tritious foods. Free brochure. Lifetime Career Schools, 
Dept. Ff08X2, (800) 326-9221. 
C
HAMP
ION CHILI - Nutritious, convenient, flavor­
ful. Send $3.00 SASE: MBO TEXT, PO Box 93, Port 
Hueneme, CA 93044. 
LIKE KITCHEN GADGETS/COOKING? Pampered 
Chef needs home party demonstrators. Fun. Easy. Excel­
lent Pay. (708) 323-8557. 
ADVERTISER INDEX 
Int'I Home Cooking 70 
Int'l Wine Ace. 78 
Int'l Ck. Sch. Ital. Fd. 7 1 
Island Traders 85 
Jabeba House 82 
Josey B. Chaco 84 
Karen Ware 71 
Kitchen Kapers 1 8 , 76 
Lamson & Goodnow 8 
Lifetime Career Sch. 82 
Lion House Ckbks. 85 
Lynn Koning 82 
Magnolia Prod. 83 
Maharaja Spice 83 
Mail Order Gour. 79 
Mangia Sftwre 77 
Melissa's By Mail 84 
MJ Gourmet 82 
Morris Press 85 
Mrs. Dog's 82 
Nancy's Spec. 70 
Nat'l Daity Bd. 2 
Nat'l Pork Prod. I I 
New England CuI. 8 1 
Nuts D'Vine 83 
Old World Coffee Trad. 85 
Peter Kump's .Y. Sch. 1 7 
Piquant Pepper 84 
Prof. Cutlery Dir. 83 
Redi-Base 84 
Replacements Ltd. 84 
Scottsdale Culinary 79 
Seafood Direct 81 
Selections 82 
ShawGuides 83, 84 
Specialty Foods 75 
Spec. by Louise 82 
Stafford's Wine 79 
Sullivan Coil. 84 
Suncoast Media 82 
Swissco Fds. 84 
The Connection 82 
Trenton Brdg. Lobster 75 
Trillium Inti. 84 
U. S. Personal Chef 79 
Victorian Cupboard 9 
WA Farmed Salmon 9 
Western CuI. 84 
Whole Earth Access 77 
Wilma Saxton 83 
Windsor Vineyards 8 1 
Wusthof-Trident 1 7 
RECIPE INDEX 
COVER RECIPES 
Bangkok-Style Glass Noodles 25 
Hot & Sour Soup 24 
APPETIZERS 
Home-Smoked Fish 61-65 
Lobster Cakes with Basil & Lobster Coulis 52-53 
BREADS & PIZZAS 
Asparagus, Prosciutto & Fontina Pizza 29 
Basic Pizza Dough 26 
Shrimp, Mussels & Hot Pepper Pizza 29 
Spinach, Mushroom & Blue Cheese Pizza 29 
CHEESE 
Yogurt Cheese 46-47 
DESSERTS, CAKES & PASTRY 
Basic Berry Filling (for shortcake) 68 
Basic Shortcake Biscuits 67 
Basic Whipped Cream 68 
Cherry & White-Chocolate Mousse Shortcakes 69 
Orange & Grand Mamier Shortcakes 69 
Pineapple, Caramel & Roasted Macadamia 
Nut Shortcakes 69 
MAIN DISHES 
Fish/Shellfish 
Lobster Cakes with Basil & Lobster Coulis 52-53 
Saute of Cod with Capers & Onions 33-34 
Saute of Monkfish with Ginger & Rum 34 
Spicy Shrimp Salad 23 
Meats 
Pork Satay with Peanut Dipping Sauce and 
Cucumber Salad 23-24 
Stuffed Boneless Pork Loin 55-57 
Poultry 
Jerky Turkey 45 
Vegetable 
Crookneck Squash with Creole 
Vegetable Stuffing 36--37 
Roasted Eggplant with Shrimp & Basil 24-25 
PASTA 
Bangkok-Style Glass Noodles 25 
PRESERVES 
Blackberry or Raspberry Cheese 4 1 
Cherry Cheese 4 1 
Cranberry Cheese 4 1 
Damson Cheese 4 1 
Peach Butter 41 
Plum Butter 4 I 
Prune Butter 41 
Tokay Grape Burrer 40-4 1 
SALADS 
Cucumber Salad 24 
Spicy Shrimp Salad 23 
SAUCES, CONDIMENTS & SEASONINGS 
Jamaican Jerk Rub 44-45 
Lobster Coulis 53 
Peanut Dipping Sauce 24 
Tomato & Pink-Grapefruit Sauce 36--37 
Worchestershire Sauce, 
Chamberlain's Enhanced 80 
SOUPS, STEWS & STOCKS 
All-Purpose Vegetable Stock 37 
Hot & Sour Soup 24 
Lobster Chowder 53 
Lobster Court Bouillon 52 
85

--- Page 86 ---
liOBITS 
Off the 
Wall 
In Jimmy Sneed's restaurant, The 
Frog and the Redneck, the walls 
are painted with a mural that 
illustrates the evolution of 
French cooking in America­
from Sneed's point of view, any­
way, and from the viewpoint of the 
artist, whose name is Happy. 
The cycle of fine dining in Amer­
ica began in the 1950s, when a
French accent qualified one 
as a chef. Happy's mural 
shows a Frenchman operat-
ing an auto-repair shop by 
day and "gourmet" restau-
rant by night. It worked, 
so in the '60s they got 
bolder, adding tuxe­
doed waiters and flam­
being the food table­
side. During the '70s, 
nouvelle cuisine raged 
throughout France, 
and young Americans 
made the pilgrimage to 
investigate. What they 
discovered was a cuisine 
marked by large plates, 
tiny portions, and huge 
bills. Luckily, nouvelle 
died, but it left a legacy 
that lives. Chefs now 
dared to break the old rules of 
classical French cooking. That, plus 
the availability of an unlimited array of
products, shipped overnight, gave rise 
to the beginning of "Modern Ameri­
can" cuisine. Unfortunately, it seemed 
the more ingredients and garnishes on 
a plate, the more the chefs and food 
writers raved. I feel that now is the 
most exciting time for American cui­
sine, as chefs have become more savvy 
and the public more appreciative. 
-Jimmy Sneed, Richmond, Virginia • 
'We buy stories about culinary adventures. 
Send them to Fine Cooking, PO Box 5506, 
Newtown, CT 06470-5506. 
86

--- Page 87 ---
Er those W'ho appreciate 
Ȩrue vintage port, 
a port -w-ith true 
vintage character. 
with cheeses, 
itself.

--- Page 88 ---
Edible 
Flowers 
of calla lilies that 
tastes as good as it 
looks. Ortrud Carstens, 
a New York City artisane 
chocolatiere, fashions flowers from 
dried pear wafers rolled around crystallized 
ginger "stamens" that are dipped in white chocoI 
late and mounted on white chocolate stems.