--- Page 1 ---
aug/sePt 2013 • no. 124
www.finecooking.com
$7.95  
Grilled Denver Steak 
and Tomatoes with 
Caper-Mustard  
Vinaigrette, p. 58
 CookFresh Blueberries, Corn, 
Melons, peaches, eggplant, plantains
Now available 
on tablets
Semifreddo 
Better than ice cream
  How to make
grilled 
Vegetables
 plus 18 ways 
 to use them
New Steaks  
Worth getting to know
a traveler’s guide to  
Cooking on Vacation
 succulent,  
 slow-roasted 
suMMer 
toMatoes

--- Page 2 ---
We believe a watched pot wi ll indeed boil, 
 if you give it enough BTUs.
Do You Have Your Heat In Th e Right Place? Ever put on a big pot of water 
for a pasta dinner, then wondered if it might be breakfast time before it ever 
boils? Do the vegetables in your wok slowly steam to wimpy limpness instead 
of quick-cooking to caramelized crispness? Say goodbye to all that with 
a Wolf multi-function cooktop. It puts the heat 
where you need it to produce the results you want.
Amazing Power Takes Shape. Th e multi-function 
cooktop ingeniously shapes its powerful gas fl ame 
to concentrate heat in precisely the right spot for 
stir-frying. It boils water with incredible speed too. 
Control Everything. Even Your Counter Space. Th e 
multi-function cooktop is one of the seven Wolf 
integrated modules, each 15 inches wide. Others include a gas grill, a fryer, 
a steamer, and an induction cooktop. Add a specialty function alongside a 
full-size cooktop or range. Or combine them à la carte to create your own 
custom cooking array–and countless amazing meals. wolfappliance.com
Wolf multi-function 
cooktop, one of 
seven 15-inch integrated 
modules–grill, 
steamer, fryer, and more.

--- Page 3 ---
Ai EAD)

ST PP

l Fis

We ted
~~ ent

4 u

--- Page 4 ---
THIS NEW TV SERIES FROM FINE COOKING, hosted by acclaimed chef Pete Evans, 
takes viewers on a delicious journey across America. Featuring the best local 
chefs cooking with the region’s freshest ingredients, each episode culminates 
in a fabulous feast that will inspire home cooks everywhere. 
For more about the show, go to www.FineCooking.TV/Feast
Coming to public television!
“Moveable Feast with Fine Cooking” is a production of WGBH Boston and distributed by American Public Television.  
© 2013 The Taunton Press
Series funding provided by:
Host
Pete Evans

--- Page 5 ---
cont e n ts
august / s e pt e m b e r 2 0 1 3 i s su e 1 24
f eatu r es
 40 Cooking Away
Renting a vacation home? Pack these  
tips and recipes for lively, relaxing meals.   
By Joanne Smart
 48 From Garden to Grill
How to grill six summer favorites, and 18 
simple ways to serve them.  By Judith Fertig
 56 The Kindest Cuts
Full flavored and tender, these inexpensive 
steaks will change the way you think about 
beef.  By Lynne Curry
 60 Biscuits & Beyond
Five delicious treats from one versatile 
dough.  By Ruth Cousineau
 68  Slow-Roasted  
Summer Tomatoes
Chef Marc Vetri’s method makes a good 
thing even better. 
 72 Lobster Rolls
classic/classic update Enjoy the 
seaside classic or try it as a spicy steamed 
bun.  By Jasper White and Dale Talde
 78  Ten Things You Didn’t Know 
You Could Smoke
Add smoky flavor to everything from fruit  
to nuts.  By Lee Ann Whippen
 80 Semifreddo
recipes of the region A step by step 
guide to making this lush, creamy frozen 
Italian dessert.  By Mark Scarbrough and 
Bruce Weinstein
Heirloom toma-
toes, fresh herbs, 
and buttermilk 
biscuit dough 
come together in  
a rustic tomato-
cheese pie. Get the 
recipe on page 64.

--- Page 6 ---
CONTENTS
august/s e pt e m b e r 2 01 3 issu e 1 24
d e pa rt m ents
 14 Make It Tonight
 
 FAST AND FRESH Just 30 minutes 
to dinner, start to ﬁ nish.
 21 CookFresh
TRY THIS Plantains
WHAT WE’RE COOKING NOW
 
 Avocados, Corn, Heirloom Tomatoes, 
Honeydew Melon, Jalapeños, Japa-
nese Eggplant, Peaches, Shiitake, 
Yukon Golds
BIG BUY COOKING Blueberries
 26 Great Finds
GO SHOPPING Our latest buys 
for the kitchen and table.
 27 The Reading List
 BOOKS THAT COOK
New must-reads for food lovers. 
 28  Handling Fresh 
Fruits and Vegetables
FOOD SCIENCE Our science 
experts debunk popular myths 
behind storing, prepping, and 
cooking seasonal produce.  
 31 Summer Cocktails
 
 REPERTOIRE Bright and refreshing, 
the margarita, daiquiri, and Negroni 
are classic drinks that every cocktail 
lover should know how to make.  
 35  The Cooking Teacher’s 
Kitchen
 
 BEHIND THE KITCHEN DOOR 
Joanne Weir’s San Francisco kitchen 
does triple duty as a culinary class-
room, television set, and home cook-
ing haven.  
 87 Test Kitchen
 
 Tips, techniques, equipment, ingredi-
ents, and more, from our experts.
 92 Pairings
 
 DRINKS What to drink with 
what’s in this issue.
in every issue
 8 READERS’ LETTERS
 10 CONTRIBUTORS
 12 FINECOOKING.COM
 94 NUTRITION
 95 WHERE TO BUY IT
 96 MENUS 
 98 RECIPE INDEX
p. 21
p. 58
p. 48
p. 68
p. 40
p. 80
Gr l ed D nv r S eak 
and T m to s w th 
Caper M s ard  
Vi a gr t e p 58
 CookFresh Blueberr es Corn 
Melons peaches eggplant planta ns
Now available 
on tablets
Semifreddo 
Better than ice cream
  How to make
grilled 
Vegetables
 plus 18 ways 
 to use them
e 
  
Worth getting to know
a trave er s guide to  
Cooking on Vacation
 succu ent  
 slow roasted 
suMMer 
toMatoes
p. 56
28
14
31
21
21
Contents photographs by Scott Phillips, food styling by Ronne Day; illustration by  Sandra Dionisi
6  FI N E C OOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13
Cover Photograph by Alexandra Grablewski

--- Page 7 ---
© 2013 Palm Bay International, Boca Raton, FL.   PLEASE DRINK RESPONSIBLY.   PalmBay.com/Cinzano
CI
N 
CI
N
E
VE
RY
BO
DY
 I
N!
 A CAMPAIGN FINANCED ACCORDING TO E.C. REGULATIONS N. 1234/07
ITALY’S TIMELESS TOAST

--- Page 8 ---
Go fish!
Thanks for addressing plastic recycling in 
your June/July article “A New Way to Cook 
Fish.” I don’t know whether people will take 
the time to wash and dry plastic storage bags 
so they can be recycled, as your article notes, 
but I appreciate that you addressed the ques-
tion. I hope you’ll continue to look for waste-
free ways to prepare delicious food.
—Ann Hempelmann, 
Hermosa Beach, California
Laurent Gras is a genius. His recipe for 
Poached Cod with Green Olives and Potato 
Purée (“A New Way to Cook Fish,” June/
July) was six stars. The fish was perfect, and 
I will use this method forever. Being from the 
Northwest, I used halibut and was surprised 
when it melted in my mouth. I also enjoyed 
the Strawberry Mojito (“Strawberries in 10”) 
with mint from my garden.
—Teri Melnichuk, Portland, Oregon
Recipes to make  
the neighbors jealous
Your June/July issue is just fab. I made the 
Herbed Aïoli Burgers (“Got Herbs?”) with 
grass-fed beef and served them with Grilled 
Iceberg Wedges with Tomato, Bacon, and 
Blue Cheese (“Salads that Sizzle”) for Sunday 
dinner. My family went nuts, and the smell 
drove the neighbors crazy with jealousy. I 
love your magazine; keep up the great work. 
—Sandie Ward, Laguna Beach, California
Berry kid-friendly treats
My kids and I are loving the recipes from 
“Strawberries in 10” (June/July). We’ve en-
joyed the Eton Mess (I omitted the liqueur for 
my daughter), and Strawberry-Yogurt Brûlée 
is an easy and delicious treat for breakfast 
or after school. Nothing gets a second grader 
out of bed faster than hearing mommy fire up 
the blowtorch.
—Jennifer Mach, Chicago
Blue-ribbon barbecue
We have a winner! I’ve made barbecued 
chicken many times, but Jamie Purviance’s 
Barbecued Chicken Legs recipe (Repertoire, 
June/July) really stands out as one of the 
best. The sauce is superb and pairs well with 
the rub and the smoky chicken. I used a com-
bination of leg quarters and bone-in breasts, 
and they all came out perfectly tender. We 
will definitely make this one again and again.
—Ann Baker, Western Springs, Illinois
the Winner
Use a plastic spoon to fish out egg shells
When a tiny piece of egg shell falls into my mixing bowl along with 
the egg, I find that a small plastic spoon works even better than a 
large eggshell or a metal spoon to retrieve it. I’m not sure why this 
works, but the shell just clings to the plastic and comes right out.
                                                                               —Patricia R. Milillo, via email
We want to hear from you. Send us your best 
tip and we’ll pick a winner from all the entries. 
Patricia is the winner of a one-year subscrip-
tion to Fine Cooking.
Call or write: 
Fine Cooking, the taunton Press  
63 S. Main St., PO Box 5506  
newtown, Ct 06470-5506  
tel: 203-426-8171  
email: fc@taunton.com
readers’ letters
Editor  Jennifer armentrout
Executive Art Director  alison wilkes
Senior Food Editor  Shelley wiseman
Senior Editors   Denise Mickelsen 
Joanne Smart
Associate Editor  layla Schlack
Senior Copy/ 
enid Johnson 
 
Production Editor
 
Associate Art Director  Pamela winn
 
Staff Photographer  
Scott Phillips
 
Photo Editor/Stylist  Kelly Coughlan Gearity
 
Associate Food  ronne Day 
 
Editor/Stylist
 
Associate Food Editor 
Julissa roberts 
 Administrative Assistant 
Diane Patterson
 
Assistant Food Stylist/ 
abby Simchak 
 
Recipe Tester
 
Test Kitchen Intern  emily Schurgin
 
Photography Intern  Kevin Keane
 
Editor at Large  Susie Middleton
 Consulting Editor at Large  Joanne weir
 
Contributing Editors   Melissa Denchak  
tasha DeSerio 
abigail Johnson Dodge  
Maryellen Driscoll  
rebecca Freedman 
allison ehri Kreitler 
Kimberly Y. Masibay  
Melissa Pellegrino 
tony rosenfeld 
Molly Stevens 
Patrick watson
 Special Projects Editor  Kathy Kingsley
 Senior Managing Editor,  Carolyn Mandarano 
 
Books
FineCooking.com
 Executive Web Producer  Victoria North
 
Senior Web Producer  Sarah Breckenridge
 
Web Producer  robyn Doyon-aitken
Fine Cooking: (ISSN: 1072 5121) is published  
six times a year by The Taunton Press, Inc.,  
Newtown, CT 06470 5506. Telephone  
203 426 8171. Periodicals postage paid at  
Newtown, CT 06470 and at additional mailing  
offices. GST paid registration #123210981.
Subscription Rates: U.S., $29.95 for one year, 
$49.95 for two years, $69.95 for three years. 
Canada, $31.95 for one year, $53.95 for two years, 
$75.95 for three years (GST included, payable in 
U.S. funds). Outside the U.S./Canada: $36 for one 
year, $62 for two years, $88 for three years (pay
able in U.S. funds). Single copy U.S., $6.95. Single 
copy Canada, $7.95.
Postmaster: Send address changes to  
Fine Cooking, The Taunton Press, Inc.,  
63 South Main St., PO Box 5506, Newtown,  
CT 06470 5506. 
Canada Post: Return undeliverable Canadian  
addresses to Fine Cooking, c/o Worldwide Mailers, 
Inc., 2835 Kew Drive, Windsor, ON N8T 3B7, or 
email to mnfa@taunton.com.
Printed in the USa
8  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / s e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 9 ---
For more recipes, visit www.colavita.com
facebook.com/colavitaoliveoil
pinterest.com/colavitaevoo
1 each red, yellow and green bell peppers,
cored and cut into quarters
2 zucchini, trimmed, cut lengthwise into 
1/4 inch slices
2 yellow zucchini, trimmed and cut lengthwise 
into 1/4 inch slices
12 mushrooms, cleaned with stems removed
1 eggplant, sliced across into 1/2 inch rounds
1 large red onion, sliced into 4 even rounds
COLAVITA Extra Virgin Olive Oil,  to coat 
vegetables                                                                           
1 clove garlic, minced
2 tablespoons Italian seasoning
Salt and pepper, to taste
Dressing: Mix well or blend in a 
food processor 
¼ Cup COLAVITA Balsamic Vinegar 
¼ cup COLAVITA Extra Virgin Olive Oil                                                                                                  
1 clove garlic, minced
2 tablespoons Italian seasoning 
Salt and pepper, to taste
Ingredients:
In a large bowl, toss the bell peppers, zucchini, yellow squash and mushrooms together and 
drizzle with enough oil to coat.  Add a good pinch of salt and pepper.  Brush the eggplant 
rounds and onions with olive oil; season lightly with salt and pepper - set vegetables aside    
Heat the barbecue to medium-high.  Working in batches, if necessary, place the vegetables on 
the grill; grill until tender and lightly charred, basting occasionally with the dressing.  Remove 
cooked vegetables to a serving platter; drizzle with remaining dressing.  Season to taste with 
salt and pepper.  Serve warm or at room temperature.  Makes 6 - 8 Servings
Preparation:
Grilled Summer Vegetables with 
Balsamic Vinaigrette Dressing

--- Page 10 ---
contributors
Lynne Curry (“The Kindest 
Cuts,” p. 56) is a writer, 
private chef, and cooking 
teacher who focuses on 
sustainable food issues. She 
is the author of Pure Beef: 
An Essential Guide to Artisan Meat with 
Recipes for Every Cut.
•  My biggest food-related pet peeve is… 
photos of grilling that show shooting 
flames, which are never a good thing 
for food.
•  My guilty food pleasure is… the sand-
wiches I make with Nutella and Petit 
Beurre cookies for my afternoon snack. 
•  My least favorite food is… bananas; I 
don’t even want them in my smoothie. 
Marc Vetri (“Slow-Roasted 
Summer Tomatoes,” p. 68) 
learned the craft of Italian 
cooking in Bergamo, Italy, 
where he was taught by 
some of the region’s most 
notable chefs. Now the chef/owner of 
Vetri, Osteria, Alla Spina, and Amis 
restaurants in Philadelphia, he’s also the 
author of two cookbooks: Il Viaggio di 
Vetri and Rustic Italian Food.
•  If I were not a chef I would be… a musi-
cian. I actually played guitar in a band 
called Mild Mustard.
•  The dish I most want to learn how to 
make is… Chinese hand-pulled noodles.
•  The best thing about my job is… that to 
me it’s not a job. I love what I do. 
A former test kitchen direc-
tor for Gourmet magazine 
and the author of Country 
Suppers, Ruth Cousineau 
(“Biscuits & Beyond,” p. 60) 
develops recipes for cook-
books, magazines, and websites from her 
home in Seattle.
•  My latest kitchen purchase was… a large 
cast-iron stove-top grill I found at 
Goodwill for $14.
•  My favorite thing to grill is… skirt steak; 
I love its juicy, fatty, beefy flavor, espe-
cially with a bit of char.
•  My favorite food obsession is… grilled 
pork bahn mi sandwiches. The Viet-
namese food in Seattle is terrific.
Jasper White (“Lobster 
Rolls,” p. 72) is the chef/
owner of Summer Shack,  
a boisterous take on the 
classic beachside eatery, 
which has four locations in 
Massachusetts and Connecticut. A 
leading seafood authority, he’s the author 
of four cookbooks, including Lobster at 
Home and The Summer Shack Cookbook.
•  My most recent kitchen purchase was… 
whatever broke last—it’s hard to keep 
track with so many restaurants.
•  The most underrated ingredient is… the 
vanilla bean. If it were newly discov-
ered, it would be on the cover of every 
food magazine in the world.
•  If I were not a chef, I would be… lost, 
unfulfilled.
Dale Talde (“Lobster Rolls,” 
p. 72) is the chef/co-owner 
of three New York City res-
taurants: the Asian-Amer-
ican-inspired Talde, the 
roadhouse-style bar Pork 
Slope, and Thistle Hill Tavern, special-
izing in seasonal American food. He was 
also a popular contestant on Top Chef.
•  Three items always in my fridge are… 
ranch dressing, Sriracha, and fish sauce.
•  The dish I most want to learn how to 
cook is… perfect sushi rice; you can 
spend a lifetime working on it. 
•  My guilty food pleasure is… Burger King. 
I’m not even going to try and lie about it. 
Judith Fertig (“From Garden 
to Grill,” p. 48), co-author of 
The Gardener & the Grill and 
Championship BBQ Secrets 
for Real Smoked Food, lives in 
Kansas City, Missouri.
•  My favorite food splurge is… Christopher 
Elbow artisan chocolate.
•  My latest food obsession is… Yotam  
Ottolenghi’s Israeli and Lebanese  
recipes; they’re so full of flavor.
•  My guilty food pleasure is… aged Peeps. 
You open the package, throw it in the 
back of your kitchen cabinet, and wait 
a month or two until they’re “cured” to 
crunchy perfection.
 
Photographs, from top left, by Steve Sullivan, next two courtesy of the authors, Nicole Slater Photography, Steve Legato, Timothy Aguero Photography
Group Publisher  
 Maria Taylor 
mtaylor@taunton.com
 
VP, Advertising Sales  
 Rick Straface 
rstraface@taunton.com
 
Advertising Sales 
Clare Liberis 
 
Director 
203-304-3532 
 
 
cliberis@taunton.com
 Custom Solutions Manager Brenden Delaney 
 
 
203-304-3590 
 
 
bdelaney@taunton.com
 
Senior National 
Jennifer Pascal 
 
Account Manager  
203-304-3530 
 
 
jpascal@taunton.com
 
Senior National 
Judy Caruso 
 
Account Manager  
203-304-3468 
 
 
jcaruso@taunton.com
 
 Advertising Sales  
Karen Walker 
 
Midwest 
262-664-3209 
 
 
kwalkermedia@gmail.com
 
West Coast  
John Iavarone 
 
 
415-264-6757 
 
 
iavarone.john@gmail.com
 Advertising Sales Assistant 
Diana Mackey
Senior Advertising 
Karen Lutjen 
 
Marketing and 
 
Operations Manager
Assistant Advertising  
Kandace Doyle 
 
Marketing Manager
Member Audit  
Bureau of Circulation  
Digital Marketing Director  
Sara Ezrin Larsen
 
Senior Consumer  
Melissa Robinson 
 
Marketing Manager
 Senior Director, Interactive  Michael Stoltz
Independent publishers since 1975 
Founders, Paul & Jan Roman
 
President  
Timothy Rahr
 
CFO  
Richard Browning
 
Group Publisher  
Anatole Burkin
 
Group Publisher  
Maria Taylor
 SVP, Creative & Editorial  
Susan Edelman
 
 SVP, Operations  
Thomas Luxeder 
 
VP, Single Copy Sales  
Jay Annis
 VP, Consumer Marketing 
Nancy Hallberg
 
VP, Advertising Sales  
Rick Straface
 
VP & Controller  
Wayne Reynolds
 
VP, Finance  
Kathy Worth
 
VP, Human Resources  
Carol Marotti
 
VP, Fulfillment  
Patricia Williamson
Publishers of magazines, books, videos, and online 
Fine Woodworking  •  Fine Homebuilding 
Threads  •  Fine Gardening  •  Fine Cooking   
www.taunton.com
10  Fi n e Cook i nG • a uG / S e P T 2 0 13

--- Page 11 ---
ONLINE SHOP FOR FINE JAPANESE 
BRANDS AT GREAT SAVING PRICES
Have you heard?
  
is now on the iPad and tablets.
Call 800-309-8940  
to learn more about  
advertising opportunities!
720-0871
720-0872
720-0870
KitchenAid™ Even Heat™ Technology ensures exceptional grilling over the entire cooking surface. 
And commercial-grade stainless steel allows the grill to stand up to harsh conditions and makes  
it easy to clean and maintain  
Learn more at www.kitchenaidgrills.com
Tantalize Taste Buds and Ignite Inspiration.
Dealers interested in carrying the KitchenAid family  
can contact KitchenAidGrills@Nexgrill.com
WE KNOW COOKING 
INSIDE AND OUT
®/™ ©2013 KitchenAid. All rights reserved. 
Manufactured under license by Nexgrill Industries, Inc., Chino, CA. Warranty provided by manufacturer.
The #1 Swiss Brand of
Cookware and Cooks’ Tools
Form + Function + Quality + Color
This is how we design playful yet 
practical cooks’ tools that make your 
kitchen time fun, fast and easy.
kuhnrikon.com/fine

--- Page 12 ---
finecooking.com
On the Web
News from the digital side of Fine Cooking.
Follow us on
Follow us on
Find us on
Join the conversation about recipes and cooking.
CheCk out our new look!  
FineCooking.com has been redesigned from top to bottom  
with more-intuitive navigation, visual browsing,  
and bigger, beautiful photos of our recipes.  
Plus, you’ll find the same straightforward design  
whether you visit on a computer, tablet, or mobile phone.
Available for iPad, Windows, and now Android tablets, 
Fine Cooking’s tablet editions are the same gorgeous 
issues you love but full of interactive extras like videos 
and search. Download the app at FineCooking.com/
app. Access is free with your print subscription.
Digital Editions Now Available  
on Android Tablets
To contact us: 
Fine Cooking 
The Taunton Press 
63 South Main Street  
PO Box 5506 
Newtown, CT 06470 5506 
Tel: 203 426 8171
Send an email to: 
fc@taunton.com
Visit:  
www.finecooking.com
To submit an article proposal: 
Write to Fine Cooking at the address above or  
Call: 800 309 0744 
Fax: 203 426 3434 
Email: fc@taunton.com
To subscribe or place an order: 
Visit www.finecooking.com/fcorder  
or call: 800 888 8286  
9am 9pm ET Mon Fri 
9am 5pm ET Sat
To find out about Fine Cooking products: 
Visit www.finecooking.com/products
To get help with online member services: 
Visit www.finecooking.com/customerservice 
To find answers to frequently asked questions: 
Visit www.finecooking.com/FAQs
To contact Fine Cooking customer service: 
Email us at support@customerservice.taunton.com
To speak directly to a customer service  
professional: 
Call 800 477 8727 9am 5pm ET Mon Fri
To sell Fine Cooking in your store: 
Call us toll free at 866 452 5179, or 
email us at tradecs@taunton.com
To advertise in Fine Cooking: 
Call 800 309 8940, or  
email us at fcads@taunton.com
Mailing list:  
We make a portion of our mailing list available  
to reputable firms. If you would prefer that  
we not include your name, please visit: 
www.finecooking.com/privacy 
or call: 800 477 8727 9am 5pm ET Mon Fri
For employment information: 
Visit careers.taunton.com
The Taunton guarantee: 
If at any time you’re not completely satisfied with 
Fine Cooking, you can cancel your subscription and 
receive a full and immediate refund of the entire 
subscription price. No questions asked.
Copyright 2013 by The Taunton Press, Inc. No  
reproduction without permission of The Taunton  
Press, Inc.
12  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / s e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 13 ---
T
© 2011 The Taunton Press
Need assistance?
Taunton’s 
Customer Service
is ready to help.
If you have questions about your 
subscription to Fine Cooking
or need other assistance, please 
call Taunton Customer Service.
You’ll reach a real person 
right here at our headquarters 
in historic Newtown, Connecticut.
We’re happy to assist you
because we are here to make sure that 
our Taunton readers are well satisﬁ ed.
Call toll free 888-351-3612 (U.S. & Canada)
or 203-702-1902 (International)
Mon. – Fri. 9 a.m. – 5 p.m. ET
or email us at 
support@customerservice.taunton.com
•  TIPS FOR MAKING WISE 
FOOD CHOICES
•  RECIPES GEARED TO WHAT’S 
FRESH IN MARKET
•  EASY AND DELICIOUS METHODS 
FOR THE HOME COOK
AVAILABLE NOW
Hardcover
Product #071372
$40.00
www.tauntonstore.com/chefs
T is extraordinary cookbook features more than 115 original recipes from 
115 of America’s best chefs, crafted for today’s home cook and celebrating 
local, organic, seasonal eating.
f i n ecooki n g .com  13

--- Page 14 ---
Just 30 minutes to dinner, start to finish
make it tonight
5 Tbs. plus 1 tsp. extra-virgin olive oil
 
1 Tbs. thinly sliced shallot
 
1 tsp. curry powder 
 
3 Tbs. white balsamic vinegar 
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground  
black pepper
 
4  boneless, skinless chicken breast 
halves (6 to 7 oz. each)
 
1 cup whole-wheat couscous
 
1  small firm-ripe mango, cut into  
1/2-inch dice
 
1/4 cup slivered almonds, toasted 
 
1  Tbs. finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley
 
2  oz. baby spinach (2 lightly packed cups)
Prepare a medium (375°F) gas or char
coal grill fire.
Heat 1 Tbs. of the olive oil in an 8 inch skil
let over low heat. Add the shallot and cook, 
stirring, until translucent, about 1 minute. 
Add the curry powder and cook, stirring, 
until fragrant, about 15 seconds. Stir in the 
vinegar and 3 Tbs. of the olive oil. Remove 
from the heat and season to taste with salt 
and pepper.
Coat the chicken with 1 Tbs. of the olive oil 
and season with 1/4 tsp. salt and a few grinds 
of pepper. Grill the chicken, flipping once, 
until well marked and cooked through 
(165°F), 10 to 12 minutes. Transfer to a 
plate and let rest.
Meanwhile, bring 1 cup water with 1/2 tsp. 
salt to a boil in a small saucepan. Put the 
couscous in a medium heatproof bowl. 
Add the remaining 1 tsp. olive oil and toss 
with your hands to coat the couscous. 
Pour the boiling water over the couscous, 
stir, and cover. Let stand 5 minutes and 
then fluff with a fork. Toss with 3 Tbs. of the 
vinaigrette, the mango, almonds, and pars
ley. Season to taste with salt and pepper. 
Toss the spinach with just enough of the 
vinaigrette to coat lightly. Divide the cous
cous among 4 plates. Top with the spinach, 
the chicken, and a drizzle of the remaining 
vinaigrette.                                  —Lauren Cartmel
It’s amazing how just a teaspoon of curry powder can make a dish so aro-
matic. Dressing both the couscous and the spinach with curry vinaigrette 
disperses its flavor throughout. Serve the chicken breasts whole or slice them 
thinly for a pretty presentation.  Serves 4
grilled chicken with curried 
couscous, spinach, and mango
Photographs by Scott Phillips; food styling by Abby Simchak, except Grilled Lamb Skewers by Ronne Day
14  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e P T 2 0 13

--- Page 15 ---
white bean burgers  
with tomato-olive relish
This veggie burger is a lively combination of classic  
Italian flavors. It’s just as good served without  
the bun.  Serves 4
1/4  cup fresh basil leaves, plus 12 small leaves
 
1  large clove garlic
 
1   oz. finely grated Parmigiano-Reggiano  
(1 cup using a rasp grater)
 
1   15-oz. can navy beans, drained and rinsed
 
1/2  cup plain panko
 
1  large egg
 
 Kosher salt
 
1  medium tomato, finely diced
 
8  Kalamata olives, pitted and chopped
 
2  Tbs. finely diced red onion
 
1  tsp. balsamic vinegar
 
2  Tbs. olive oil 
 
4  whole-wheat hamburger buns, toasted
In a food processor, pulse the 1/4 cup basil and the garlic until 
finely chopped. Add the Parmigiano, 1/2 cup of the beans, 1/4 cup of 
the panko, the egg, and 1/2 tsp. salt and process until smooth. Put 
the remaining beans in a large bowl and coarsely mash with a fork. 
Add the puréed bean and basil mixture and mix well. 
Spread the remaining 1/4 cup of panko on a plate. With wet hands, 
form the bean mixture into four 3/4 inch thick patties. Coat each 
patty with the panko, transfer to a plate, cover, and refrigerate for 
10 minutes.
Meanwhile, in a small bowl, combine the tomato, olives, onion, 
balsamic vinegar, and the remaining 12 basil leaves. Set aside.
Heat a heavy-duty 12-inch skillet on high heat until very hot, 
about 1 minute. Add the oil and swirl to coat the bottom. Cook the 
burgers, flipping once, until browned, 5 to 8 minutes total. Serve 
the burgers on the buns, topped with the tomato olive relish.
                                                                                                                        —Robin Asbell
grilled lamb, tomato, and  
halloumi skewers with orzo salad
A tangy, garlicky marinade made with lots of fresh oregano 
pairs perfectly with full-flavored lamb. Unlike most cheeses, 
which melt at high heat, halloumi holds up well to grilling, so 
it makes a great addition to a kebab.  Serves 4
 
 Kosher salt
10 oz. (11/2 cups) dried orzo 
 11/2  lb. boneless leg of lamb, cut into 1-inch pieces (about 48 pieces)
 
8  oz. halloumi, cut into 16 pieces
 
1/3  cup extra-virgin olive oil
 
1/4 cup red wine vinegar
 
3 Tbs. chopped fresh oregano
 
2 medium cloves garlic, minced
 
1/4 tsp. crushed red pepper flakes 
 
 Freshly ground black pepper
   16 cherry tomatoes
 
4  whole scallions, thinly sliced (about 1/2 cup)
 
1/3 cup chopped fresh mint
 
2 Tbs. fresh lemon juice; more to taste
Bring a 3-quart saucepan of well-salted water to a boil. Boil the 
orzo according to package directions. Drain, rinse with cold water, 
and transfer to a medium bowl. 
Prepare a medium (375°F) gas or charcoal grill fire.
Put the lamb and halloumi in a large bowl. In a small container with 
a lid, combine the olive oil, vinegar, oregano, garlic, red pepper flakes, 
1 tsp. salt, and 1/2 tsp. pepper. Cover tightly and shake vigorously. Toss 
the orzo with 1/3 cup of the mixture and pour the rest over the lamb 
and halloumi, tossing to coat.  
Thread 6 pieces of lamb, 2 pieces of halloumi, and 2 tomatoes 
onto each of eight 12 inch metal skewers, alternating a tomato and a 
piece of cheese between every 2 pieces of lamb. Grill, turning once, 
until the halloumi is browned and the lamb is pink in the center (cut 
into a piece to check), 4 to 6 minutes total. 
While the lamb is cooking, toss the scallions, mint, lemon juice, 
1/2 tsp. salt, and 1/4 tsp. pepper with the orzo. Season to taste with 
more salt, pepper, and lemon juice. Serve the skewers with the orzo.
—Adeena Sussman 
f I n e CookI n G .Com  15

--- Page 16 ---
FOR A GREAT FINISH, START WITH FAGE TOTAL.
FAGE Total is a truly unique and versatile authentic Greek strained yogurt.  
Discover how world-class chef Bobby Flay chooses to incorporate this 
special yogurt into new and delicious dishes at fagetotalchallenge.com
© 2012-2013 FAGE USA Dairy Industry, Inc. Trademarks are used with permission by FAGE Luxembourg S.a.r.l. All rights reserved.

--- Page 17 ---
chorizo with grilled potato-scallion salad
Grilling the potatoes, scallions, and bell peppers gives this warm 
potato salad a delicious smoky flavor that pairs well with spicy 
chorizo. You can use either cured Spanish-style chorizo, which 
requires only heating on the grill, or fresh Mexican-style chorizo, 
which needs to be cooked through.  Serves 4
1/4 cup mayonnaise
 
1  Tbs. balsamic vinegar
 1½   lb. medium waxy potatoes, such as Yukon Gold,  
peeled and sliced lengthwise 1/4 inch thick
 
1   red bell pepper, stemmed, seeded, and quartered
 
8  whole scallions, trimmed
 
3 Tbs. vegetable oil
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper
 
1   lb. chorizo
Prepare a medium (375°F) gas or charcoal grill fire.
In a large bowl, whisk the mayonnaise and vinegar until combined. 
In another large bowl, toss the potatoes, pepper, and scallions with 2 Tbs. 
of the oil, 1 tsp. salt, and ½ tsp. pepper. Rub the chorizo all over with the 
remaining 1 Tbs. oil.
Grill the vegetables and chorizo, turning occasionally, until the scallions are 
charred in places and the potatoes and pepper are tender, 3 to 5 minutes 
for the scallions, 6 to 9 minutes for the peppers, and 12 to 15 minutes for the 
potatoes. If using cured (Spanish style) chorizo, cook long enough to warm 
it through, about 8 minutes. If using uncooked (Mexican style) chorizo, cook 
until it registers 145°F on an instant read thermometer, about 15 minutes.
Transfer the scallions and pepper to a cutting board. Transfer the pota
toes to the bowl with the mayonnaise mixture and toss. Coarsely chop the 
scallions and pepper, toss them with the potatoes, and season to taste with 
salt and pepper. 
Cut the chorizo on the diagonal into thick slices and serve  
with the potato salad.                                            —Melissa Denchak
© 2012-2013 FAGE USA Dairy Industry, Inc.  
Trademarks are used with permission by FAGE 
Luxembourg S.a.r.l. All rights reserved.
Discover how world-class 
chef Bobby Flay chooses 
to incorporate FAGE Total 
authentic Greek strained 
yogurt into fresh and 
extraordinary dishes.
fagetotalchallenge.com
ONE PLAIN YOGURT. 
ENDLESS 
POSSIBILITIES.

--- Page 18 ---
grilled pork sandwiches  
with fennel, dill, and cucumber
Inspired by the fennel-forward flavors of a classic Italian porchetta 
sandwich, this grilled version made with pork tenderloin comes 
together quickly.  Serves 4
 
3 Tbs. fennel seeds, coarsely crushed
 
¼  tsp. ground allspice
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper
 
1  Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil 
 
1  medium pork tenderloin (about 1¼ lb.), trimmed  
of any excess fat and silverskin and cut in half crosswise
 
1/3  cup mayonnaise 
 
4   large sandwich rolls, split and toasted
 
½  cup thinly sliced cucumber
 
½  cup lightly packed fresh dill sprigs
Prepare a medium (375°F) gas or charcoal grill fire.
In a small bowl, combine 1½ Tbs. of the fennel seeds, 1/8 tsp. of the 
allspice, and 1/8 tsp. each salt and pepper. Stir in the oil and then 
press the mixture onto the pork. Grill the pork, turning with 
tongs, until nicely browned on all sides and 140°F to 145°F in 
the center, 17 to 21 minutes. Transfer the pork to a cutting 
board and let rest for 5 minutes.
Meanwhile, in a small bowl, combine the mayonnaise
with the remaining 1½ Tbs. crushed fennel seeds, 1/8 tsp. 
allspice, 1/8 tsp. salt, and several grinds of pepper. Spread 
the rolls with the mayonnaise mixture. Thinly slice the 
pork crosswise. Arrange the pork on the rolls with the cu
cumbers and dill. Serve warm.                 —Lori Longbotham
warm shrimp salad  
with honeydew and feta
This refreshing main course salad offers con-
trasts of all kinds—warm and cold, sweet and 
savory, herbal and spicy—but it’s the addition of 
cracked whole coriander seeds that really makes 
it sing.  Serves 4
 1½   lb. extra-jumbo (16 to 20 per lb.) shrimp, peeled  
(tails left on, if you like) and deveined 
 
 Kosher salt 
 
 Pinch cayenne
 
¼  cup extra-virgin olive oil
 
2  Tbs. finely chopped shallots
 
1   medium lime, finely grated to yield 1 tsp. zest,  
squeezed to yield 4 tsp. juice
 
 Freshly ground black pepper
 
2   heads frisée (about ½ lb.), torn into bite-size pieces
 
1   medium (3 to 4 lb.) honeydew melon, peeled, seeded, 
and cut into ½-inch dice (about 4 cups)
 
8  oz. feta, crumbled (about 1½ cups)  
 
¼  cup thinly sliced fresh mint
 
1  Tbs. plus 1 tsp. cracked coriander seeds
Season the shrimp lightly with salt and cayenne. 
In a 12-inch skillet, heat 2 Tbs. of the oil over medium
high heat until shimmering hot. Add the shrimp and 
cook on one side until pink, about 1 minute. Flip and add 
the shallots, lime zest, and 1 tsp. of the lime juice. Turn 
the heat to medium and cook until just opaque through
out, about 1 minute more.
In a large bowl, whisk the remaining 2 Tbs. oil and 
1 Tbs. lime juice. Season to taste with salt and pepper. 
Toss the frisée and the melon in the vinaigrette. Divide 
equally among 4 dinner plates, top with the shrimp, feta, 
mint, and coriander and serve.                       —Arlene Jacobs
Our daily Make it Tonight eLetter is packed with quick 
weeknight meal ideas. Sign up for it at Finecooking 
.com/MIT.
18  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e p T 2 0 13

--- Page 19 ---
parmesan-panko steaks 
with fresh tomato salsa
A crisp panko crust and an Italian-style fresh tomato 
salsa transform humble cube steaks into something 
special. Serve with smashed potatoes and sautéed 
greens.  Serves 4
 
1   lb. ripe tomatoes, cut into medium dice (about 3 cups)
 
5  Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil
 
¼    cup finely chopped white onion
 
1  Tbs. red wine vinegar
 
2  tsp. chopped fresh oregano 
 
1  medium clove garlic, minced
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper
 
4  beef cube steaks (1 to 1¼ lb. total)
 1½  oz. (13 cup) all-purpose flour
 
3  large eggs
 1½  cups plain panko
 
¾     oz. finely grated Parmigiano-Reggiano (¾  cup using a rasp grater)
Combine the tomatoes, 1 Tbs. of the oil, the onion, vinegar, 
oregano, garlic, 1tsp. salt, and ¾tsp. pepper in a medium bowl. 
Season the steaks with ½  tsp. salt and ½  tsp. pepper. Put the flour in 
a shallow dish, beat the eggs in a second shallow dish, and combine 
the panko and Parmigiano in a third shallow dish. Dredge the steaks 
in the flour, then in the egg, letting any excess drip back into the dish, 
and then in the breadcrumb mixture.
Heat 2 Tbs. of the oil in a 12-inch skillet over medium high heat. 
Cook 2 of the steaks, flipping once, until nicely browned and just 
cooked through, 4 to 6 minutes total. Transfer to a platter, cover, 
and keep warm. Repeat with the remaining steaks and 2 Tbs. oil. 
Serve the steaks topped with the salsa.                          —Carolyn Malcoun
tilapia with 
cilantro-walnut pesto
Garlicky, lemony cilantro pesto punches up the 
flavor of mild white fish such as tilapia, cod, or 
haddock.  Serves 4
 1¾    cups lightly packed fresh cilantro sprigs
 
¼   cup plus 1 Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil
 
3 Tbs. toasted chopped walnuts
 
1  lemon, half squeezed to yield 1½   Tbs. juice, 
half cut into wedges
 
1 medium clove garlic
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper
 
4  tilapia or other firm white fish fillets (about 
1 lb. total)
 
2 Tbs. unsalted butter
In a mini food processor or blender, combine the 
cilantro, ¼  cup of the oil, the walnuts, lemon juice, garlic, 
¼  tsp. salt, a few grinds of pepper, and 3 Tbs. water. Pro
cess until mostly smooth; set aside. 
Pat the fish dry and season with ½  tsp. salt and ¼  tsp. 
pepper. 
Heat the remaining 1 Tbs. oil and 1 Tbs. of the butter 
in a 12 inch nonstick skillet over medium heat until the 
butter melts and its foam subsides. Cook 2 of the fillets, 
turning once, until browned and just cooked through, 
about 4 minutes total. Transfer to a platter, cover, and 
keep warm. Repeat with the remaining fish and 1 Tbs. 
butter, adjusting the heat as necessary. 
Serve the fish with the pesto and lemon wedges.   
—Carolyn Malcoun
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  19

--- Page 20 ---
The inspired beauty of natural light and the fresh air a skylight can supply will change a room in a way no other 
redesign or renovation can. To behold the drama being brought to life in this room, go to dramaheights.com.
©2013 VELUX Group
ADD DRAMA TO ANY SPACE.
Install the No Leak 
Solar Powered 
“Fresh Air” Skylight 
and receive an 
average of $850* 
with tax credit eligibility.
*For information go to veluxusa.com/taxcredits
30%
Federal Tax
Credit
Eligible for

--- Page 21 ---
Shop Smarter, Eat Better
cookfresh
Plantains
these tropical mainstays look like oversize 
bananas and taste a bit like them, too. But plan-
tains (which can be pronounced plan-tins or 
plan-tanes), or plátanos machos in Spanish, are 
like three fruits in one because they can be eaten 
at three distinct stages of ripeness, each with a 
different texture and flavor. Unripe, with green 
peels, they’re firm and starchy with a potato-like 
flavor that has subtle banana and peanut notes. 
When the peels are yellow with brown spots, 
they’re partially ripe and slightly softer, with a 
delicately sweet flavor that’s a mix between ba-
nana and butternut squash. And in their ripest 
state, when their peels are dark brown or black, 
they have a creamy texture and a buttery taste. 
This diversity makes these so-called cooking 
bananas a favorite in hot climates around the  
world.                                    Continued on page 22
try this
f i n e cooki n g .com  21

--- Page 22 ---
A starchier banana
The genus Musa includes bananas and plan-
tains, which have grown wild in the South 
Pacific and Southeast Asia since prehistoric 
times. The plants, which fruit year-round 
in tropical climates, were spread across the 
globe by traders and explorers. Over time 
and through cultivation, bananas became a 
distinct species from plantains. The former 
has a higher water content (about 83 per-
cent) and can be eaten raw, while the latter is 
starchier (about 65 percent water) and must 
be cooked unless very ripe.
Slow to ripen
Plantains are available year-round in Latin, 
Caribbean, Asian, and African markets, in 
addition to well-stocked grocery stores.  
Select those with the fewest blemishes and 
no mold on the peels, which should be firm 
and give only slightly under pressure at any 
stage of ripeness.
Plantains should be stored at room temper-
ature out of direct light. Green ones will ripen 
to dark brown or black in two to three weeks. 
Once completely ripe, they can remain at 
room temperature for three to five days. 
Before they ripen fully, plantains can be 
difficult to peel. The easiest way is to slice off 
both ends, then score along the bulging seam. 
Gently pry open the slit and slide your fingers 
under the peel to remove it. To preserve plan-
tains at a desired stage of ripeness, peel them 
and freeze them whole, well wrapped in plastic. 
Different uses for 
different ripenesses
Firm, starchy, unripe green plantains can be 
used like potatoes—they’re often thinly sliced 
and fried into chips. Two traditional Latin-
Caribbean dishes, tostones and mofongo, also 
use green plantains. Tostones are slices of 
plantain that are fried, smashed flat, and then 
fried again. Mofongo is a dish made from fried 
cubes of plantain mashed into a thick paste 
that’s mixed with meat. Green plantains pair 
well with assertive flavors like chile, onion, and 
curry, as well as with fatty meats like pork.
Partially ripened yellow plantains can be 
boiled or fried, then mashed to a doughy con-
sistency to make dumplings or African fufu, a 
porridge-like dish. They can also be cut into 
planks and grilled, fried, or baked—at this 
stage of ripeness, they have enough sugar 
that they’ll caramelize a bit, but they’re still 
firm enough to hold their shape. With their 
sweet and savory notes, yellow plantains 
try this
plantains
plátanos maduros fritos
Sliced ripe plantains retain a sweet, creamy center and become caramel-
ized around the edges when fried. This tasty side dish makes a good  
accompaniment to rice and beans, roasted pork, or both.  serves 6 to 8
 
  Vegetable or canola oil
 
 4  very ripe, dark-brown plantains 
(2 lb.), ends removed, peeled,  
and sliced 1/2 inch thick on a sharp 
diagonal
Fill a 12-inch heavy-duty skillet with 
1/4 inch of oil (about 11/2 cups) and heat 
over medium heat until the tip of a 
plantain slice dipped in the oil sizzles 
vigorously. 
pair well with other savory ingredients that 
have some sweetness, like garlic and onions. 
They also benefit from some acid, like lime, or 
tangy ingredients like sour cream or cheese, 
and they have a creamy flavor that pairs well 
with black beans. 
Ripe, darkened plantains, or maduros in 
Spanish, can be quite sweet and are more 
flavorful than green or yellow plantains. They 
can be eaten as a side dish, either baked, 
sautéed, or fried like the Plátanos Maduros 
Fritos above. Fried planks of sweet, ripe plan-
tains are used in place of noodles in a Puerto 
Rican lasagne called pastelón, but more often 
maduros are served as a dessert. They pair 
well with warm spices like cinnamon, cloves, 
and car da mom, or with sweet flavors like 
vanilla, coconut, and brown butter.
 —Layla Schlack
Photographs by Scott Phillips; food styling by Ronne Day
Working in batches of about 12, slide 
the plantain slices in one at a time, 
making sure they’re not touching. Fry, 
flipping once with tongs or a fork, until 
golden brown on both sides, 4 to 6 min
utes total. Transfer to a paper towel
lined plate. Repeat with the remaining 
plantains, reheating the oil as needed 
between batches. Serve hot.
                                                  —Julissa Roberts
Get a recipe for tostones (fried green 
plantains) at FineCooking.com/extras.
22  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / S e P T 2 0 13

--- Page 23 ---
Photographs by Scott Phillips, except bottom left by Colleen Katana
ONE READER’S SEASONAL SPECIALTY
Peach, Feta, and Peppadew Salsa
Roast or grill fresh peaches. Skin, dice, and toss with 
crumbled feta and chopped Peppadew peppers. 
Season with fresh lemon juice, olive oil, 
and salt. Serve with chicken, ﬁ sh, or 
tortilla chips.   —Alejandra Ramos, New York
Heirloom Tomato
and Avocado Toasts
Mash ripe avocado onto hearty 
whole-grain toast. Season with 
salt, then layer with thick slices 
of ripe heirloom tomato. Season 
the tomatoes with salt, pepper, 
and a drizzle of extra-virgin 
olive oil.                 —Denise Mickelsen
Honeydew Melon
Parfaits
Mix honey and chopped fresh 
mint into Greek yogurt. In a par-
fait glass, layer the yogurt with 
granola and bite-size pieces of 
honeydew.          —Emily Schurgin
Quick-Pickled 
Jalapeños and 
Vegetables
Sauté sliced jalapeños, carrot, 
and onion in olive oil with 
cauli flower florets, smashed 
garlic cloves, thyme sprigs, and 
a bay leaf until the onion is 
golden. Add cider vinegar to 
just cover and salt and sugar to 
taste. Boil until the jalapeños 
are a deep olive green. Cool and 
refrigerate, covered, for up to 
3 weeks. Serve as a snack or 
hors d’oeuvre, on sandwiches, 
in tacos, or wherever a little 
heat is needed.   —Julissa Roberts
Twice-Baked
Yukon Golds
Bake potatoes until just tender. 
Halve, scoop the centers out, 
and mash with soft butter, 
crème fraîche, and minced 
Kalamata olives. Season with 
salt and pepper. Fill the potato 
skins with the mixture and broil 
until browned.              —Ronne Day
Japanese Eggplant 
Salad with Miso 
Vinaigrette
Slice Japanese eggplants into 
rounds and grill until tender. 
Make a vinaigrette with white 
miso, rice vinegar, Asian sesame 
oil, soy sauce, and grated ginger. 
Toss the eggplant with slices 
of cucumber, halved cherry 
tomatoes, and the vinaigrette. 
Refrigerate for at least 30 min-
utes before serving.
—Layla Schlack
Sautéed Corn 
and Shiitake
Sauté coarsely chopped shiitake 
and red onion in butter until 
tender and lightly browned. Add 
fresh corn kernels, season well 
with salt and pepper, and sauté 
briefly. Add a splash of balsamic 
vinegar and sauté until most of 
the liquid is gone. Add another 
dab of butter to finish.
—Joanne Smart
What we’re cooking now
Fine Cooking editors (and a reader) share 
some delicious ideas for in season ingredients.
mart
een Katana
AT THE MARKET
Feta, and Peppadew Salsa
r grill fresh peaches. Skin, dice, and toss with
ed feta and chopped Peppadew peppers.
with fresh lemon juice, olive oil,
. Serve with chicken, ﬁ sh, or 
chips.  —Alejandra Ramos, New York
W
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  23

--- Page 24 ---
problem: you love fresh blueberries and want to use them for more 
than just topping your cereal, but paying top dollar for them makes you stingy 
once you get them home. Solution: Head to the warehouse store, where you 
can pick up a big 2-lb. box of sweet, ripe blueberries for less than $10
With that many blueberr es on hand, you’re going to need plenty of ways 
to use them up. Instead of making the obvious pie or pancakes, try these 
recipes for something deliciously diﬀ erent: a refreshing tequila-and-lime-
infused fruit salad, a tender berry-studded cake, and a quick refrigerator 
jam (no canning required). Recipes (and a bargain) this good are sure to put 
you in a most generous mood.
Blueberries
A summertime steal at the warehouse store.  
BY SHE L L EY WI S E M A N
blueberry muﬃ  n-cake 
This cake is really muffin batter baked in a cake pan. 
It’s a perfect summertime breakfast treat, especially 
when served still warm from the oven.  Serves 8
 
4  oz. (½   cup) unsalted butter, melted and cooled slightly; 
more for the pan
 
9   oz. (2 cups) unbleached all-purpose flour
 1¼    cups granulated sugar 
 
2 tsp. baking powder
 
1 tsp. kosher salt
 
½   cup whole milk
 
2 large eggs
 
1 tsp. pure vanilla extract
 
¾    lb. (2 cups) fresh blueberries
 
  Confectioners’ sugar, for dusting (optional)
Position a rack in the center of the oven and heat the 
oven to 350°F. Butter the bottom and sides of a 9 inch 
round springform pan. 
Sift the flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into a large 
bowl. In a small bowl, whisk the butter, milk, eggs, and 
vanilla. Using a silicone spatula, stir the wet ingredients 
into the dry ingredients just until incorporated. Fold in the 
berries. Scrape the batter into the prepared pan, spread
ing it evenly. Tap the pan on the counter once or twice to 
break any air bubbles.
Bake until golden-brown and a tester inserted in the 
center of the cake comes out clean, 45 to 55 minutes 
(if the top gets too brown, tent with aluminum foil). 
Cool on a wire rack for 10 to 15 minutes. Run a paring 
knife around the edge of the cake and remove the side 
of the pan. Transfer the cake to a serving plate and serve 
warm or at room temperature, with confectioners’ sugar 
sifted over the top, if you like. 
What: Fresh blueberries.
How much: 2 lb.
How to store: Pick through and discard any stems 
and bruised or moldy berries. Refrigerate, unrinsed, 
in their original packaging for up to 10 days (to 
extend their shelf life, see Food Science, page 28). 
Before using, rinse, drain, and gently pat dry.  
The Big Buy
problem: you love fresh blueberries and want to use them for more
than just topping your cereal, but paying top dollar for them makes you stingy 
once you get them home. Solution: Head to the warehouse store, where you
can pick up a big 2-lb. box of sweet, ripe blueberries for less than $10
With that many blueberries on hand, you’re going to need plenty of ways
to use them up. Instead of making the obvious pie or pancakes, try these
i
f
thi
d li i
l diﬀ
t
f
hi
t
il
d li
recipes for something deliciously diﬀerent: a refreshing tequila-and-lime-
Blueberries
A summertime steal at the warehouse store. 
BY SHE L L EY WI S E M A N
What: Fresh blueberries.
How much: 2 lb.
How to store: Pick through and discard any stems
and bruised or moldy berries. Refrigerate, unrinsed,
in their original packaging for up to 10 days (to
extend their shelf life, see Food Science, page 28).
Before using, rinse, drain, and gently pat dry.
Before us
The Big Buy
BIG BUY COOKING 
24  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 25 ---
Photographs by Scott Phillips; food styling by Ronne Day
blueberry fruit salad 
with tequila-lime syrup
A margarita-inspired syrup enhances the tart-sweet flavor 
of this summery fruit salad. For an alcohol-free version, use 
water in place of the tequila.  Serves 4 to 6
 
¾    lb. (2 cups) fresh blueberries 
 
4  medium kiwi, peeled, halved lengthwise, then sliced crosswise 
 
1  large ripe mango, peeled, pitted, and cut into bite-size pieces
 
½   cup granulated sugar
 
¼  cup 100% agave tequila, preferably reposado (see Test Kitchen, 
p. 87)
 
2  medium limes, finely grated to yield 2 tsp. zest and squeezed 
to yield 2 Tbs. juice
Put the blueberries, kiwi, and mango in a medium serving bowl. 
Combine the sugar, tequila, and lime zest in a 1 quart saucepan 
and bring to a simmer over medium heat, stirring to dissolve the 
sugar. Remove from the heat and stir in the lime juice. Pour 
the warm syrup over the fruit and gently toss. Cover and 
refrigerate until cold, at least 1 and up to 6 hours. Gently 
toss before serving. 
quick blueberry jam
Perfect for spreading on toast, croissants, or biscuits, or for 
swirling into yogurt or oatmeal, this super-simple jam will 
keep—without canning—for up to 2 weeks in the refrigerator.
Yields about 2½   cups
 1½    lb. (4 cups) fresh blueberries
 
1 cup granulated sugar
 
3  Tbs. fresh lemon juice (from 1 medium lemon)
Put the berries and 2 Tbs. water in a 3-quart heavy-duty sauce-
pan over medium high heat. Using a potato masher, stir and mash 
the berries until they are bubbling around the edges of the pan, 
about 2 minutes. Add the sugar and cook, stirring occasionally, until 
dissolved, about 1 minute. 
Add the lemon juice, increase the heat to high, and bring to a rolling 
boil. Boil, stirring occasionally, until the mixture registers 218°F on 
a candy or probe thermometer, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove the pan 
from the heat and let cool for 5 minutes. 
Transfer to a heatproof bowl or container and cool to room tem
perature, stirring occasionally, about 1 hour. Refrigerate in an airtight 
container for up to 2 weeks.
ood styling by Ronne Day
blueberry fruit salad
with tequila-lime syrup
A margarita-inspired syrup enhances the tart-sweet flavor 
of this summery fruit salad. For an alcohol-free version, use
water in place of the tequila. Serves 4 to 6
¾    lb. (2 cups) fresh blueberries 
4  medium kiwi, peeled, halved lengthwise, then sliced crosswise
1 large ripe mango peeled pitted and cut into bite-size pieces
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  25

--- Page 26 ---
go shopping
Great Finds
Our latest buys for the kitchen and table.  By L ayL a S c h L ac k
Snack-in-the-Box
Sleek and bright, Takenaka ben
to boxes are perfect back to
school accessories for kids of all 
ages. Two compartments have 
room for lunch and snacks. 
The airtight lid is the only piece 
that is not microwave and 
dishwasher safe. $30; omoion 
line.com; 215-545-0963.
Bottle Service
Make a great cocktail away from your 
home bar with the Bar10der. It comprises 
a knife, bottle opener, cork screw, muddler, 
reamer, stirrer, strainer, zester, channel knife, and 
jigger. Nondrinkers will also find it handy think 
fresh lemonade garnished with a perfect citrus 
twist. $39.99; thebar10der.com. 
Catch This Ketchup
ketchup tastes grown up when it’s 
made with sun dried tomatoes. It 
packs a wallop of tomato flavor 
with a peppery, vinegary kick. Use it 
on burgers and dogs during grilling 
season, or add a hint of summer to 
meatloaf. $4.99 for 16 oz.; 
trainafoods.com; 209-892-5472.
They Can Dish It Out
Petite serving tools add 
a pop of color to your 
party spread, not to 
mention the function
ality of a spreader, a 
slotted spoon, and two 
serving spoons. Micro
wave and dishwasher
safe, they only look 
dainty. $14.99 for a set 
of four; royal-doulton
.com; 877-900-9973.
Photographs by Scott Phillips
Ruby Sipper
We can’t confirm that 
everything’s bigger in 
Texas, but this austin
produced, 10 times
distilled vodka certainly 
has massive ruby red 
flavor. Sipped on the 
rocks or with a splash 
of club soda and a twist 
of lime, it’s the perfect 
pour at the end of a 
long, hot day. $15.95 
for 750 ml; crown 
wineandspirits.com; 
866-946-3830.
Jam Session
In Southeast asia, 
coconut jam called 
srikaya or kaya, the 
Malay word for 
rich on toast is a 
common breakfast. 
Pourable and 
intensely coconutty, 
it’s also tasty over 
waffles, ice cream, or 
yogurt. $11 for 8 oz.; 
heyboojams.com.
That’s a Wrap
This reusable alternative to plastic 
wrap is made from muslin coated 
with antibacterial beeswax and 
jojoba. Soften the beeswax with the 
warmth of your hand, and mold the 
sheet to cover dishes and wrap food. 
One caveat: They can be washed 
only in cool water, so we wouldn’t 
use them with meat. $16 for a set  
of three sizes; beeswrap.com.
26  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e P t 2 0 13

--- Page 27 ---
BOOKS THAT COOK
The Reading List
New must reads for food lovers.  B Y KIM B E RLY Y. MA S IBAY
that’s more practical than preachy. (Seaver heads 
up the Healthy and Sustainable Food Program at 
the Harvard School of Public Health.) An abun-
dance of recipes for all sorts of nongrilled goodies 
(cocktails, pickles, salads, soups, sides) will see you 
through this summer and many more to come.
Grilled Potato Salad (p. 86)
In this smoky, spicy, creamy, tangy version of potato 
salad, new potatoes are boiled with vinegar, grilled, 
and tossed in a yogurt-based dressing flavored with 
sliced scallions and roasted poblanos.
Flank Steak with Radicchio and Plum Salad (p. 232)
This terrific, easy recipe takes grilled steak from 
ordinary to unforgettable as sweet plums and smoky 
beef meet the bitter crunch of radicchio. 
Di Bruno Bros. House of Cheese
A Guide to Wedges, Recipes, and Pairings
By Tenaya Darlington (Running Press, $25)
This seductive little book is no ordinary cheese 
guide. Author Tenaya Darlington (creator of the 
popular Madame Fromage blog) takes a playful 
approach: Teaming up with the experts at Phila-
delphia’s famed Di Bruno Bros. House of Cheese, 
she personiﬁ es the world’s greatest artisan cheeses 
to help you ﬁ nd a cheese to love. You’ll meet mild, 
friendly “Quiet Types” like Lancashire and man-
chego, luxurious “Vixens” such as Brie de Meaux 
and Robiola Bosina, picnic-ready “Free Spirits” like 
Bûcheron and Bulgarian feta, and hardened “Wise 
Guys” such as scamorza and Pecorino Toscano. 
Tantalizing descriptions, tasting notes, and pairing 
suggestions along with buying, storing, and serving 
tips and 30 recipes round out the volume. 
Manchego and Marcona Almond Pesto (p. 53)
Yum! This recipe unites mild-mannered manchego, 
almonds, garlic, arugula, lemon, and olive oil for a 
toasty, peppery, bright-tasting pesto that’s perfect 
for pasta or crusty bread. 
Pickled Feta with Cerignola Olives and Strawberries 
(p. 73)
Tangy, sweet, and briny ingredients come together in 
this surprising and wonderfully satisfying salad. 
Kimberly Y. Masibay is a Fine Cooking 
contributing editor.
Saving the Season
A Cook’s Guide to Home Canning, 
Pickling, and Preserving
By Kevin West (Alfred A. Knopf, $35)
Kevin West’s superb new book on the art of home 
canning seems destined to become a classic. West, 
a former reporter and editor, is a thoughtful and 
nimble writer who ﬁ nds poetry, beauty, and wonder 
in the technical and sometimes daunting endeavor 
of preserving nature’s bounty. Though raised in the 
South where his family practiced “putting up,” West 
didn’t do his own preserving until 2008, when he 
found himself with a ﬂ at of strawberries and a han-
kering to make jam. Frustrated by the information 
available, he ﬁ gured out how to do it on his own and 
began a blog, also called Saving the Season. In the 
book, he elucidates the hows and whys of canning, 
while weaving in family lore, literary excerpts, and 
musings on history, art, and philosophy. The book’s 
200-plus recipes encompass the savory and the 
sweet: Sunshine Pickles, Heirloom Tomato Sauce, 
Whole-Grain Mustard, Plum Liqueur, Wild Black-
berry Molasses, and Thrifty Applesauce are but a 
small taste of the recipes oﬀ ered in this thoroughly 
researched and deeply engaging guide.
Basic Strawberry Jam (p. 52)
This simple jam is what kick-started West’s passion 
for preserving. In the book, the recipe appears twice, 
once in short form and once annotated, making it the 
perfect starting point for a novice jam maker. Because 
it uses less sugar, its flavor is wonderfully intense. 
Cucumber Dill Spears and Chips (p. 147)
These refrigerator pickles have a fresh cucumber 
flavor and snappy crunch; if processed in a boiling-
water bath for long-term storage, the pickles will be 
softer in texture but still delicious. 
Where There’s Smoke
Simple, Sustainable, Delicious Grilling
By Barton Seaver (Sterling Epicure, $30)
With a focus on fruits and vegetables, award-
winning chef Barton Seaver’s beautiful new grilling 
book stands out from the mass of meat-obsessed 
barbecue books on the market. Its compelling 
recipes—think Wood Grilled Snap Peas with Smoky 
Aïoli and Ember-Roasted Squash Hummus—mingle 
the delectable ﬂ avors of seasonal produce with hints 
of smoke and ﬁ re. There are also detailed essays 
on grilling techniques and informative ingredient 
guides, which include sustainability information 
For recipes from these cookbooks, visit 
FineCooking.comextras.
FROM OUR 
CONTRIBUTORS
Pastry chef Joanne 
Chang is beloved for the  
sweets she chronicled in 
her first book, Flour. But 
her Boston-area baker-
ies also offer exceptional 
savory fare. Hence Flour, 
Too (Chronicle, $35), 
which includes recipes 
for soups, sandwiches, 
pizzas, and pastas as 
well as desserts. 
In Crackers & Dips 
(Chronicle, $19.95), 
Ivy Manning shares her 
homemade cracker 
recipes and persuasively 
presents the case that 
they’re tastier, healthier, 
and less expensive than 
those found at the mar-
ket. There’s also a whole 
chapter on cracker’s 
raison d’être called Dips, 
Spreads, and Schmears.  
                                  —the editors
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  27

--- Page 28 ---
food science
ripe tomatoes, sweet corn, juicy berries
 
they’re at their best right now, but their time 
is fleeting. How to make them last longer? 
What’s the best way to prepare them? Such 
questions are pressing for any home cook at 
this time of year, so here, we’ll discuss 
common ways of handling fresh produce, 
debunk the myths surrounding it, and bring 
truly helpful information to light. Along the 
way, you can test your own produce IQ with 
this quick true-or-false quiz.
True or False: Removing the seeds from 
spicy chiles tames their heat.
False. Capsaicins, the pungent compounds 
in chile peppers, are produced by the pep-
Handling Fresh Fruits and Vegetables
Our science experts debunk popular myths behind storing, prepping, and cooking seasonal produce.
By Dav i D J oac h i m an D an D r ew S c h loS S
per’s placenta, a spongy mass of flesh at 
the center of the pepper pod. The seeds are 
attached to the placenta, and sometimes the 
placenta ruptures, releasing small amounts 
of capsaicin onto the seeds. However, the 
lion’s share of tongue-searing capsaicin re-
sides in the placenta itself, which includes the 
ribs inside the pepper pod. So to take down 
the heat level of a chile, be sure to remove the 
ribs as well as the seeds.
True or False: You should eat fresh corn 
as soon as you buy it.
True. Shortly after fresh corn is cut from 
the stalk, its sugars begin converting to 
starch. Some varieties of sweet corn lose 
nearly 50 percent of their sweetness when 
left at room temperature for just a few hours. 
For the best results, buy corn that has been 
recently picked and keep it refrigerated until 
you cook it. Wait to shuck it until just before 
cooking, as the husks help retain moisture, 
keeping the corn juicy. 
True or False: Salting eggplant removes 
its bitterness.
MosTly False. Modern purple globe egg-
plant has been bred to taste mild, so there’s 
little bitterness to remove. But even for 
bitter varieties, salting doesn’t remove bitter 
compounds so much as it suppresses them. 
This holds true for all bitter foods and drinks, 
the Science of
Illustration by Sandra Dionisi 
28  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 29 ---
from coffee to tonic water. Science has yet to 
fully explain the mechanics, but the sodium 
ions somehow disrupt our perception of bit-
ter alkaloid compounds.
True or False: Tomatoes should not be 
refrigerated.
True. While refrigeration extends the shelf 
life of most fruits and vegetables, some 
produce, such as bananas and tomatoes, 
can succumb to what’s known as chill injury. 
If ripe tomatoes are refrigerated they lose 
flavor, because sub-40°F temperatures cause 
the disappearance of cis-3-hexenal, a volatile 
flavor compound that gives tomatoes their 
signature aroma. For the most flavor and 
longest shelf life, store tomatoes between 
50°F and 55°F, perhaps in a cool cellar or a 
wine refrigerator.
True or False: Don’t wash berries until 
you’re ready to eat them.
True and False. It’s true that rinsing 
berries moistens them, and if left wet, the 
moisture can hasten mold growth during 
storage. That’s why it’s often recommended 
to wash berries just before eating them. 
However, briefly soaking berries in warm 
water can actually extend their life. This 
process is called thermotherapy. Various 
studies show that immersing whole strawber-
ries, raspberries, and blackberries in 125°F 
water for 30 seconds helps prevent mold 
development. Blueberries can handle water 
up to 140°F. After immersing the berries,  
dry them gently with paper towels. Then 
refrigerate the berries at 35°F to 40°F for  
the longest shelf life. 
True or False: You can ripen underripe 
summer fruit in a paper bag.
False. The paper bag method works only 
with fall and winter fruits that store starch, 
such as apples, pears, bananas, mangos, 
and kiwis. This starch is later converted to 
sugar when the fruit is exposed to ethylene, a 
hydrocarbon gas naturally emitted by plants. 
At home, you can increase the sweetness 
of these unripe fruits by putting them in a 
paper bag with a piece of already-ripe fruit 
that emits ethylene, such as a yellow banana. 
Summer fruits like peaches, plums, cherries 
and melons don’t store starch, so they can’t 
be made sweeter by exposure to ethylene 
after harvest. For the sweetest summer fruit, 
pick or buy it fully ripened. 
True or False: Asparagus is best cooked 
upright. 
True. Like all plant stems, asparagus stalks 
can be tough and fibrous. But the most prized 
parts of this vegetable, the delicate bracts 
clustered at the tip, are much more tender 
and easily overcooked. To cook the two parts 
of asparagus evenly, it’s best to arrange the 
spears upright in boiling water so that the 
submerged stalks simmer in the water while 
the tips steam gently above its surface. You can 
buy special asparagus cookers for this purpose, 
but a tall, narrow pot works just as well.
True or False: Tearing lettuce leaves by 
hand does less damage than cutting them 
with a knife. 
False. Some cooks recommend tearing sal-
ad greens with your fingers so that the leaves 
rip along natural junctures between the leaf 
fibers, thereby keeping the lettuce more 
intact. It turns out, though, that manhandling 
lettuce exacerbates the damage it purports 
to avoid, because of forceful squeezing and 
irregular stretching and tearing of leaf fibers. 
Cutting lettuce with a sharp knife blade does 
less damage to the leaves and keeps the leaf 
fibers more intact.
True or False: Strawberries harbor 
more pesticide and herbicide residues than 
other fruits.
MosTly True. Strawberries are always on 
the Dirty Dozen list of most contaminated 
produce, which is issued annually by The 
Environmental Working Group (ewg.org/
foodnews), a consumer advocacy organiza-
tion. In past years, tests have shown that 
strawberries harbor more pesticide and 
herbicide residues than any other fruit. But 
recently, apples and peaches have surpassed 
strawberries in total contaminant residues. 
Nonetheless, tests show that convention-
ally grown strawberries bear traces of 60 
pesticides, so it’s still advisable to eat organic 
strawberries (as well as the rest of the Dirty 
Dozen) whenever possible.
David Joachim and Andrew Schloss are the 
authors of the award-winning reference book 
The Science of Good Food.
How does the 
crisper drawer 
work?
Fresh fruits and vegetables are 
crisp because their cells are 
packed with water; in fact, most 
produce consists of at least 70 
percent water. For delicate lettuce 
leaves, losing as little as 5 percent 
of that moisture causes wilting. 
That’s why baby salad greens so 
often turn limp. 
The crisper drawer in your 
refrigerator is designed to retain 
moisture within fruits and 
vegetables. To achieve just the right 
amount of moisture in the air, 
crisper drawers are vented with 
levers or dials to adjust the 
humidity and air flow. For the 
crispest vegetables, especially 
leafy ones, keep the vent one-third  
to one-half open to ensure a humid 
environment yet allow some 
ventilation. 
For crisp fruit, keep the vent 
closed to minimize the amount of 
oxygen that flows into the compart-
ment. It may sound strange, but ripe 
fruit breathes on a cellular level. 
Plant cells take in oxygen and give 
off carbon dioxide. During the final 
stages of ripening, cell respiration 
increases by as much as five times, 
so closing the crisper vent slows 
down respiration and increases the 
storage life of the fruit.
f I n e cookIn g .com  29

--- Page 30 ---
Love Fine Cooking?
There’s a lot more to love...
Read Fine Cooking Magazine: 
Get six idea-ﬁ lled issues including FREE tablet 
editions. Every issue is packed with triple-tested 
recipes, expert advice, step-by-step techniques – 
everything for people who love to cook! 
Subscribe today at: 
FineCooking.com/4Sub
Discover our Fine Cooking Online Store: 
It’s your destination for premium resources 
from America’s best cookbook writers, chefs, 
and bakers: cookbooks, DVDs, videos, special 
interest publications, and more. 
Visit today at: 
FineCooking.com/4More
Get our FREE Fine Cooking eNewsletter: 
Our Make It Tonight weekday email supplies you 
with no-fail recipes for quick, wholesome meals; 
our weekly eNewsletter inspires with seasonal 
recipes, holiday menus, and more.
Sign up, it’s free: 
FineCooking.com/4Newsletter
FREE
tablet
editions
T
© 2013 The Taunton Press
30  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ s e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 31 ---
repertoire
how to make
a great margarita can change your life. One did 
for me anyway: I was on my friend Lorenzo’s boat off the coast 
of Mexico, serving him one of my signature margaritas, when we 
decided to open a Mexican restaurant together. Was it that per-
fect blend of tangy lime, sweet agave, and good Mexican tequila 
that sealed the deal? Who knows? Either way, that drink is now 
a favorite at our restaurant, Copita Tequileria y Comida in 
Sausalito, California. 
Margaritas are my specialty, but I like to offer an 
array of refreshing, summery cocktails when I have 
people over. The bittersweet Negroni (a blend of dry 
gin, sweet vermouth, and Campari) and the daiquiri 
(the real deal—a crisp mix of citrus, rum, and simple 
syrup—not frozen or from a machine) both fit the 
bill. Served over ice, any of them is the perfect pick-
me-up on a hot day. Boat optional.
Summer Cocktails
Bright and refreshing, the margarita, daiquiri, and  
Negroni are classic drinks that every cocktail lover 
should know how to make.  B y J OaN N E WE Ir
Need to Know
Shake cocktails that contain thick mixers. if you’re 
making a margarita, daiquiri, or any cocktail that 
combines spirits with syrup, dairy, creamy liqueur, or 
egg whites, you’ll need the agitation from shaking to 
properly blend the ingredients. 
Stir cocktails with clear components. when mixing 
a cocktail that’s all spirits, like the negroni, or when  
using a clear mixer like club soda or tonic water, stirring 
is all the agitation you need to combine the ingredients. 
Strain out the ice after shaking or stirring. the 
agitation from stirring or shaking has started to melt 
and chip the ice, so leaving it in will dilute the cocktail 
too much. i like a hawthorne strainer (shown above), 
which has large enough openings to allow for free 
pouring and a spring to strain the cocktail while keeping 
the strainer in place over the shaker’s opening. (the 
strainers that are built into many cocktail shakers are 
adequate, but their narrow openings slow pouring.)  
Use simple garnishes that complement and 
enhance the cocktails’ flavor. we taste with our 
eyes before our mouths, so cocktails should look 
pretty. for the margarita, daiquiri, and negroni, 
simplicity and elegance are key. use a citrus wheel,  
wedge, or twist.
f i Ne cooki Ng .com  31

--- Page 32 ---
See a slideshow of more classic summer 
cocktails, like the mojito and the Tom 
Collins, at FineCooking.com/extras.
negroni
This ruby-red Italian classic is pleasantly 
bitter with a hint of sweetness from the 
vermouth. Rubbing an orange twist 
around the rim gives the drink a lovely 
aromatic note. A dry gin with hints of 
citrus and not too much juniper is the 
perfect foil for all of these flavors.  Serves 1 
 
1   fl. oz. (2 Tbs.) best-quality dry gin, such  
as Plymouth
 
1  fl. oz. (2 Tbs.) Campari
 
1   fl. oz. (2 Tbs.) best-quality sweet (rosso) 
vermouth, such as Carpano Antica
 
1 small navel orange
Fill a cocktail shaker or large glass halfway 
with ice and add the gin, Campari, and ver
mouth. Using a long handled spoon, stir for 
20 to 30 seconds. Strain into a chilled rocks 
glass over fresh ice (or a chilled martini glass if 
you prefer no ice). 
Using a vegetable peeler, remove a 3 x 1/2 inch 
piece of peel from the orange, avoiding the 
white pith, to create a twist. Twist it over the 
drink to release a spray of citrus oil, run it 
around the rim of the glass, and then drop it 
into the drink. Serve. 
daiquiri
This is one of the oldest cocktails in 
existence, a refreshing blend of citrus, 
rum, and simple syrup. Straightforward 
and elegant, it’s a far cry from the 
familiar frozen version. You can buy 
simple syrup, but it’s easy to make and 
will keep, covered and refrigerated, for 
months.  Serves 1 
 
2   fl. oz. (4 Tbs.) white rum, such as  
Flor de Caña or 10 Cane
 
¾  oz. (1½ Tbs.) simple syrup
 
 ¾   oz. (1½ Tbs.) fresh lime or lemon juice
 
 Lime or lemon wedge
Fill a cocktail shaker with ice and add the 
rum, simple syrup, and juice. Put the lid on  
the shaker and make sure it has a good seal. 
Shake vigorously until the outside of the 
shaker is frosty, 10 to 15 seconds. Strain into  
a chilled martini glass, garnish with the lime 
wedge, and serve.
Note: To make simple syrup, bring equal parts 
granulated sugar and water to a boil over me
dium heat. Stir until the sugar has dissolved 
and then cool.
margarita
Margaritas are often made with an or-
ange liqueur like Cointreau, which I find 
too sweet. Freshly squeezed lime juice—
never bottled—has plenty of citrus 
flavor, and agave syrup sweetens and 
complements the agave flavors in the 
tequila. A salted rim is not necessary, 
but many people like it because it takes 
the burn out of the alcohol.  Serves 1
1  lime wheel, with a slit cut at the center
 
 Kosher salt (optional)
 1½   fl. oz. (3 Tbs.) 100% agave tequila blanco 
(silver), such as Patrón or Milagro
  1½  fl. oz. (3 Tbs.) fresh lime juice
 
¾  fl. oz. (1½ Tbs.) light agave nectar
For a salted rim (optional), run the slit of 
the lime wheel around the rim of a chilled 
rocks glass (or a chilled martini glass if you 
prefer no ice) to moisten, then dip the rim 
into a small dish of kosher salt. 
Fill a cocktail shaker with ice and add the 
tequila, lime juice, agave nectar, and 3/4 fl. oz 
(11/2 Tbs.) water. Put the lid on the shaker and 
make sure it has a good seal. 
Shake vigorously until the outside of the 
shaker is frosty, 10 to 15 seconds. Strain into 
the prepared glass over fresh ice (if desired). 
Garnish with the lime wheel and serve. 
Joanne Weir is the author of Tequila: A Guide 
to Types, Flights, Cocktails, and Bites, among 
other cookbooks.
Photographs by Scott Phillips; food styling by Ronne Day
Home Bar Essentials 
•  Cocktail shaker and  
Hawthorne-style cocktail 
strainer (shown on page 31) 
•  Long-handled bar spoon 
•  Citrus juicer or reamer 
(shown on page 31)
32  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e P T 2 0 13

--- Page 33 ---
©2013 Eden Foods   06375
Get recipe 
here
Versatile & Easy  
 Quick Whole Grain Potency  
 Pure & PurifyingTM
A principled natural food company. 
300 foods and 1,100+ free recipes 
edenfoods.com  |  888-424-3336

--- Page 34 ---
THE BEST OF FINE COOKING 
SUMMER MENUS
Softcover Magazine
Product # 052080
$9.99 
G i ed F ank S eak 
w th Cu umber
Y gu t Sau e p  21 
G een Be n Sa ad 
p  23 W rm Po ato 
S l d p  23 Cl ss c 
S r wber y Sho t ake 
p  25 W te me on
G n Pun h p 11
93 great mains, sides & more
T unton rodu t #052080
www f necook ng com
 SUMM R MENUS 2013
Fine Cook ng 
s now available 
on tablets
50+ ways
to entertain
all season long
Summer
u
e
Menus
THE 
BEST 
OF
SEE WHAT’S NEW IN
OUR ONLINE STORE
Chefs Collaborative 
& Ellen Jackson
Photography by Gentl & Hyers
Local, Sustainable, Delicious 
Recipes from America’s Great ChefsCookbook
The
THE CHEFS COLLABORATIVE 
COOKBOOK
Hardcover
Product # 071372
$40.00 
T e Taunton Store is your destination 
for favorite recipe collections, cookbooks 
from chefs we love, and so much more. 
T ere’s always something new to inspire 
your cooking, baking, menu planning, 
and entertaining. Plus, you’ll ﬁ nd 
special oﬀ ers and limited-time savings 
when you shop. It’s the place to go if 
you love Fine Cooking!
Cook Fresh
150 Recipes for Cooking and 
Eating Fresh Year-Round 
FINE COOKING 
COOK FRESH
Paperback
Product # 071449
$17.95 
YEARROUND 
SLOW COOKER
Paperback
Product # 071386
$19.95
D i n a C h e n e y
100 Favorite Recipes for every Season
Slow 
Cooker
y
a
n
© 2013 The Taunton Press
FRESH FOOD NATION
Paperback
Product # 071419
$22.95 
FreshFoodNatioN
 
 
Simple, Seasonal Recipes from America’s Farmers
Martha holmberg
Books, ebooks, magazines, special issues, DVDs, and more
FineCooking.com/ShopNow
Your destination for trusted cooking know-how
Simply search by product number or call 800-888-8286,  use code M5800153
Call Monday-Friday 9AM - 9PM ET and Saturday 9AM - 5PM ET • International customers, call 203-702-2204
Prices are subject to change.
Chefs Collaborative
34  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / s e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 35 ---
behind the kitchen door
 The Cooking  
Teacher’s Kitchen
Joanne Weir’s San Francisco kitchen does triple duty as a  
culinary classroom, television set, and home cooking haven.  
by c h arl e s mil l e r
when joanne weir isn’t on the road leading culinary excursions or teaching cooking 
classes in Peru or Provence, you can find her in her home kitchen-classroom-studio in San 
Francisco, writing cookbooks (number 18 is in the works), taping her popular PBS television 
show Cooking Confidence, or making dinner for herself and her husband, Joseph. 
Their Pacific Heights Victorian is personalized with souvenirs from their travels. Rugs, 
paintings, light fixtures, serving platters, and cookware from around the world help set a ca-
sual, warm atmosphere. Joanne’s mega-watt smile and infectious laugh do the rest, whether 
she’s welcoming friends, TV crews, or cooking students into her kitchen. 
I traveled to San Francisco to see if a home kitchen designed to be both a classroom and a 
television set could offer design ideas for people who cook off-camera, and to see first-hand 
if Joanne could really spit-roast a leg of lamb in her fireplace without setting off the smoke 
alarm. The answer to both questions: a resounding “yes.”
f i n ecooki n g .com  35

--- Page 36 ---
Platter display 
and storage
The Layout
“Small rooms, high ceilings, and a tiny kitchen in 
the back describes the ﬂ oor plan of just about every 
original Victorian row house in San Francisco,” 
explains Joanne. “This house was no exception.” So 
Joanne had walls knocked down to create a wide-
open space that now includes the kitchen and dining 
and sitting areas. A small bedroom was lost in the 
renovation, but the trade-oﬀ  was worth it. “The 
column and arches deﬁ ne the dining area without 
closing it oﬀ  from the kitchen, and the long diagonal 
views on all sides make the space feel expansive and 
light,” says Joanne.
On teaching days, Joanne invites her students to 
sit at the dining room table to review the menu for 
the class and discuss their game plan. Next, they 
gather around the kitchen’s big island to hone their 
knife skills and watch Joanne cook on the Wolf gas 
range. A smaller work table opposite the sink serves as 
an overﬂ ow workspace and provides open storage for 
pots and pans. It’s also Joanne’s favorite place to make 
dinner when she’s not teaching or taping her show. 
Joanne teaches through her television show, too, 
and each episode features her working side by side 
with a student. The range is the focal point of the 
show, and it was designed with a downdraft ventilation 
system so a bulky hood wouldn’t block the cameras. 
Near the island is a 
brick fireplace with 
a rotisserie. San 
Francisco ironworker 
Jefferson Mack cus-
tomized the fireplace 
for Joanne, adding a 
1-rpm motor that turns 
a chain-driven spit 
cradled by a pair of 
forged-steel brackets. 
A custom copper pan 
sitting on the hearth 
catches drippings from 
roasting meat, like the 
leg of lamb at left. “A 
pair of gas jets in the 
floor of the firebox 
makes it easy to light 
the logs without having 
to mess around with 
kindling,” explains 
Joanne. “Jefferson 
made it so user-friendly 
that my students cook 
on it all the time.” 
Porch
Pantry
Work table
DW
Oven
Ref
Dining area
Kitchen
Island
Sideboard
Column
Fireplace
Sitting area
36  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG / S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 37 ---
“Having a 
Wolf 6-burner gas 
range and an additional 
convection oven helps my 
students and me prepare 
more food in less time. I love 
Sub-Zero/Wolf appli-
ances—they’re reliable 
and powerful.”
“In the 
back of the 
kitchen is a small walk-in 
pantry and my wine fridge. 
The pantry keeps my countertop 
appliances and dry goods out of sight, 
leaving more space in the main kitchen 
for my students. And I couldn’t live 
without the wine fridge; having several 
bottles on hand and at the correct 
temperature—a regular 
refrigerator keeps them too 
cold—is a gift.”
Built-in shelves and cabinets behind 
the dining table and free-standing 
pieces like this colorful Moroccan-
inspired sideboard (above) give 
Joanne plenty of space to store 
and display the beautiful collection 
of platters, flatwear, tablecloths, 
napkins, and place mats they’ve 
brought back from their travels. “My 
students enjoy picking out which 
pieces to use for serving the lunch 
we’ve made together,” she says.
f i n ecooki n g .com  37

--- Page 38 ---
Joanne’s Must Have Cooking Tools
Here’s the inside scoop on the tools Joanne recommends for her students, and why.
See a video tour of 
Joanne’s kitchen 
and enter to win 
her favorite cooking 
tools at FineCook 
ing.comextras.
Charles Miller is a freelance photojournalist and former Fine Homebuilding editor 
who lives in northern California.
“ I’ve tried other pepper mills, but 
I always come back to my Perfex. 
Its pull-out chute makes it easy 
to fill, and I can regulate the grind 
with the adjustable carbon-steel 
grinding mechanism.” Perfex 
pepper mill, $89.95, surlatable
.com, 800-243-0852.
“ My Vitamix blender is as power-
ful as a small chain saw. It turns 
puréed soups into velvet, ice into 
snow, and I don’t have to take it 
apart to clean it. It’s pricey, but 
worth every penny.” Vitamix 
Professional Series 500, $649, 
vitamix.com, 800-848-2649.
“ Where have these brilliant angled measuring cups been all 
my life? They let you accurately gauge the amount of liquid 
in the cup by simply looking down, instead of squatting 
in front of the cup. The 1-cup measure is especially good 
for small quantities, like the lime juice for my signature 
margaritas [see the recipe on page 32].” Oxo three-piece 
angled measuring cup set, $19.99, oxo.com, 800-545-4411.
“ When a recipe calls for peeled ripe tomatoes or peaches 
and I don’t want to make my students go to the trouble 
of blanching and shocking them first, I hand them my 
serrated swivel peeler. Its razor-sharp teeth make short 
work of the thin skin, which comes off easily in long curls.” 
Messermeister Pro-Touch Serrated Swivel Peeler, $10, 
messermeister.com, 800-426-5134.
See a video tou
Joanne’s kitc
and enter
her fav
too
C
“ One of my favorite things in my 
kitchen is my Wüsthof knife 
collection. These knives are per-
fectly balanced, have a comfort-
able grip, and hold an edge really 
well. They’re great for cooks of all 
levels.” Wüsthof Classic 9-inch 
chef’s knife, $175; 6-inch chef’s 
knife, $125; 3½  -inch paring knife, 
$67; 8-inch serrated 
knife, $120; cutlery 
andmore.com, 800-
650-9866.  
38  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG / S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 39 ---
kitchenandcompany.com
TM
The Cooking, Dining and Entertaining Store.  
FREE
SHIPPING
 over  49. 
$
Enter code
FC49
*
*UPS Ground only. Limited to the 48 contiguous states. Certain exclusions apply.
 A limited number of larger items have a $5 surcharge.
Christiana,  DE • Asheville, NC • Newington, NH
Bel Air,  MD • Lewes, DE • Wilmington, DE
Recipes and more at belgioioso.com 
 rBST Free* | Gluten Free | Vegetarian Friendly
*No significant difference has been found in milk from cows treated with artificial hormones.
Fresh 
Mozzarella
Taste BelGioioso Fresh Mozzarella’s clean, 
mild, sweet flavor and delicate, milky texture. 
Made only a few hours after milking,
 BelGioioso Fresh  Mozzarella 
complements any meal. We hand-craft 
a variety of specialty sizes and styles 
for appetizers, salads, 
sandwiches or pizzas. 
At BelGioioso, every 
cheese is a specialty.
STAND IN
 COMFORT®
The Original Gel-Filled Comfort Mat
DESIGNER
TOP SURFACE
•Does not absorb 
   liquids
•Stain-resistant
•Easy-to-clean
•Durable
100% GEL CORE
•Provides therapeutic support
   while standing on hard floors
•Reduces discomfort & fatigue
•Cradles feet in softness, yet
   does not bottom-out like
   memory foam
NON-SLIP
BOTTOM
Certified by the
National Floor Safety
Institute for
high traction
Order yours today!
GelPro.com | 1.866.435.6287
Made in the USA
Select mats at

--- Page 40 ---
Cooking   
        Renting a vacation home? Pack these tips and              
                             recipes for lively, relaxing meals. 
40  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG / S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 41 ---
FOR VACATIONS LASTING LONGER THAN a couple of 
days, my family almost always rents a house, 
condo, or cottage. We get much more space 
that way, and there’s usually a washer and dryer, 
which means I don’t have to do as much math 
when packing underwear and socks. But most 
important to me, there is a kitchen.
I love to cook, even while away. When we 
rent a place with friends, my favorite part of 
the day is relaxing around the table after a day 
of sightseeing or hiking or body surfing at the 
beach. I also like access to a kitchen because I 
get tired of eating every meal out and because 
I can cook with local specialties, like lobster in 
Maine or Dungeness crab in California. 
Cooking on vacation can be a challenge, 
though. For starters, you don’t have your pan
try. Things like ground cumin and maple syrup, 
always on hand at home, have to be packed or 
purchased. And after years of renting vacation 
houses, both here and abroad, expensive or 
not, I’ve come to realize they all have one thing 
in common: lousy kitchen tools. 
But by keeping the food simple, using fresh 
ingredients, and packing a few essential tools, 
cooking on vacation can be truly relaxing and 
fun so long as someone else does the dishes.
 Away
 B Y JOAN N E SMART
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  41

--- Page 42 ---
Sharp knives  Rarely are rental knives 
sharp.  (My theory: Renters put everything 
in the dishwasher, even knives and non-
stick skillets.) But sharp knives sure come 
in handy, whether you’re slicing crusty 
bread, trimming meat, or sharpening a 
pencil for keeping score during a game of 
Yahtzee. Just don’t pack your best; see 
Test Kitchen, page 87, for inexpensive, 
lightweight ones. If you’re flying, be sure 
the knives aren’t in your carryon luggage.  
Tongs Truly all-purpose, a pair of tongs 
is useful for fishing an ear of corn out of 
boiling water, flipping a piece of bacon, or 
grabbing an errant toy from behind the 
couch. You’ll also look cooler at the grill 
with a normal pair of tongs instead of those 
Nonstick skillet  I’ve found that at most 
rentals, the nonstick pan is more stick 
than non. Packing your own takes up less 
room in your suitcase than you might 
imagine, as clothes can nestle right into it.  
Just you and your mate? An 8- or 9-inch 
pan should suffice. If a larger group is  
going, consider a 10- or 12-inch pan.
Thin, flexible nylon spatula Whether 
you’re flipping fried eggs or salmon fil-
lets, you want a spatula that’s thin and 
heatproof, as nothing spoils a morning on 
vacation quicker than the smell of burning 
plastic. (Plus, it won’t scratch the nonstick 
pan you packed.) A silicone spatula, the 
kind used mostly for mixing, is also handy, 
especially for scrambled eggs.
ridiculously oversize ones from the barbe-
cue “kit” that most vacation homes seem 
to stock.  
Disposable pepper mill  Your place might 
come with a tin of ground pepper, but 
do you have any idea how old that pep-
per is? Freshly ground pepper makes a 
simple green salad or grilled steak taste like 
restaurant fare, which is what you deserve 
on vacation. Pack a prefilled disposable 
pepper mill, which you can find in the spice 
section of the supermarket. You can also 
bring a disposable salt grinder or pack some 
kosher salt in a baggie.
Instant-read thermometer OK, you’re 
thinking, now we’re going overboard. But 
an instant-read thermometer is tiny and 
cheap, and if you plan to do a lot of grilling, it 
will make determining doneness much less 
stressful. And isn’t less stress what vacation 
is all about?
Your packable vacation cooking kit
There SeemS To be Some SecreT pacT among vacation rental owners that every kitch-
en must have a crock of those cheap black plastic utensils, including a spatula that melts 
at the mere suggestion of heat. This is why I always pack a few must-have tools that can 
easily fit in a suitcase and if left behind won’t cause heartbreak. 
P ho to gra p hs by Je nnife r May
42  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / s e Pt 2 0 13

--- Page 43 ---
1   cup pitted black olives, such as Kalamata
 
1/2  cup extra-virgin olive oil
 
1/2  cup finely chopped fresh herbs, such as a 
mix of parsley, rosemary, and thyme
 
4   large cloves garlic, minced and mashed to 
a paste with a pinch of salt 
 
4   to 41/2 lb. butterflied leg of lamb
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground  
black pepper
 
1/2  large lemon, seeded
Finely chop the olives until paste like. Whisk in 
half of the olive oil and 1 Tbs. of the herbs. (Re
frigerate if not using within a few hours; let come 
to room temperature before using.)
Combine the remaining herbs and oil with 
the garlic in a small bowl. 
Rub the herb and garlic marinade all over 
the lamb and wrap it well in plastic wrap. If 
grilling right away, let sit at room temperature 
for 1 hour. If not, refrigerate for up to 24 hours. 
When ready to grill, prepare a medium 
(375°F) charcoal or gas grill fire. Season the 
lamb generously with salt and pepper. 
Grill the lamb, flipping once, until the 
thickest part is 120°F for medium rare, 15 to 
18 minutes. 
Transfer the lamb to a cutting board, 
squeeze the lemon half over it, tent with foil, 
and let rest for 10 minutes. Thinly slice across 
the grain, drizzle any accumulated juice over 
it, and serve with the olive purée.
—Joanne Smart
grilled boneless leg of lamb with black olive purée
This herb-and-garlic-rubbed lamb is super easy to make yet so full of flavor,  
especially when paired with a tangy olive spread and a squeeze of lemon. If you 
don’t have a grill, you can roast the lamb in a 425°F oven for about 25 minutes. 
Serve with potatoes and green beans or a green salad topped with goat cheese.  
Serves 8
Why make it  
on vacation?
Lamb is an elegant 
change of pace from 
steak, but it’s just as 
easy to cook. The mari-
nade can be adapted 
to whatever herbs you 
have on hand. Plus left-
overs are great the next 
day on a sandwich or in 
a main-course salad.

--- Page 44 ---
4   3/4-inch-thick slices crusty country bread, 
preferably cut from the center of a round 
loaf
 
1/4  cup mayonnaise
 12  very thin slices deli ham (about 6 oz.)
 
2   to 3 medium ripe tomatoes, sliced 1/2 inch 
thick
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground  
black pepper
 
6  oz. extra-sharp Cheddar, coarsely grated 
(about 11/2 cups)
 
1  oz. (2 Tbs.) unsalted butter
 
4  large eggs
 
6 oz. baby arugula (about 6 cups)
 
2  Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil
 11/2   Tbs. balsamic vinegar or lemon juice
Position a rack in the center of the oven and 
heat the oven to 450°F. 
Spread each slice of bread with about 1 Tbs. 
mayonnaise and put on a baking sheet. Top 
each piece with 3 slices of ham and 2 or 
3 slices of tomato.  Season with salt and pep
per. Top with the cheese and bake until the 
cheese melts and the edges of the bread are 
light golden brown, about 10 minutes. 
Meanwhile, melt the butter in a 12 inch 
nonstick skillet over medium heat until the 
foam subsides. Crack the eggs into the pan 
and fry them sunny side up until the whites 
are set but the yolks are still soft, about 2 min
utes. Toss the arugula with the oil and vinegar 
and season to taste with salt and pepper. Top 
each sandwich with an egg, season with salt 
and pepper, and serve with the salad.
—Emily McKenna
ham, egg, and cheese melt 
An open-face ham and cheese sandwich topped by a fried egg makes a hearty 
breakfast or an excellent late-night snack. Tomato and lightly dressed arugula add 
brightness to complement all that gooey goodness.  Serves 4
Why make it  
on vacation?
A breakfast this big and 
tasty will fuel you well for 
an action packed vaca
tion day. The sandwiches 
are also simple and quick 
to prepare and can 
be made all at once or 
cooked to order. 
44  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / S e p T 2 0 13

--- Page 45 ---
simple seafood stew
It’s hard to decide which is better, the mix of fresh, sweet seafood or the briny,  
buttery broth in the bottom of the bowl. Fortunately, each aromatic bowlful of  
stew contains plenty of both. Serving some crusty bread with this dish for mopping 
up the broth is simply nonnegotiable.  Serves 4
 12   jumbo shrimp (21 to 25 per lb.), peeled 
(reserve the shells) and deveined
 
1   clove garlic, smashed and peeled, plus 
1 Tbs. finely chopped
 
4   large sprigs fresh parsley, plus 1/4 cup 
chopped
 
1  oz. (2 Tbs.) unsalted butter, more to taste
 
1  Tbs. olive oil
 
1/4  cup finely chopped shallot
 
1  cup dry white wine
 
2  dozen small littleneck clams, scrubbed
 
1   lb. mussels, scrubbed and debearded
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground  
black pepper
 
1  large ripe tomato, seeded and diced
 
8   large sea scallops, side muscle removed, 
halved horizontally
In a 5- to 6-quart pot, toast the shrimp 
shells and the garlic clove over medium high 
heat, stirring, until the shells turn pink, 1 to 
2 minutes. Add the parsley sprigs and 2 cups 
water, bring to a boil, then boil for 3 minutes. 
Strain the broth into a bowl and reserve.
Heat the butter and olive oil in the cleaned 
pot over medium heat until the butter is 
melted. Add the chopped garlic and the 
shallot and cook, stirring, until the garlic is 
fragrant, about 1 minute. Add the wine and 
the reserved shrimp broth and bring to a boil 
over high heat. 
Add the clams and mussels and cook, cov
ered, until the mussels start to open, about 
4 minutes. As they open, transfer them with 
a slotted spoon to a large, wide serving bowl 
or 4 large individual bowls. Continue to cook 
the clams, stirring occasionally, until they 
start to open, about 2 minutes more. Transfer 
them to the serving bowl. (Discard any clams 
or mussels that don’t open after 8 minutes.) 
Sprinkle with half of the chopped parsley. 
Reduce the heat to medium and season the 
brothwith salt and pepper to taste. Add the 
tomato, scallops, and shrimp to the broth, 
cover, and cook until the shrimp turn pink and 
the scallops are opaque, about 2 minutes. 
Transfer the shrimp, scallops, and broth to  
the bowl and sprinkle with the remaining 
chopped parsley. 
                                                                      —Joanne Smart
Why make it  
on vacation? 
If you are vacationing 
by the water, a seafood 
dinner is a must, and 
you can add or substi-
tute whatever is local: 
crab or lobster for the 
scallops, squid for the 
mussels, and cockles for 
the clams. If you can get 
prawns, try them instead 
of shrimp. 
f i n e Cooki n g .Com  45

--- Page 46 ---
spicy italian ham and salami sandwich
A mojo-like sauce made with fresh lime juice, garlic, and lots of fresh oregano  
perks up the flavor of a classic Italian sub.  Serves 6 
 
1/2   cup finely chopped fresh oregano  
(about 1 small bunch)
 
1/2  cup extra-virgin olive oil
 
6  Tbs. fresh lime juice (from 3 to 4 limes)
 
2   large cloves garlic, minced
  
  Kosher salt and freshly ground white  
or black pepper
 
1   large ciabatta loaf
 
3   oz. tender lettuce leaves (about 3 cups) 
 
6  oz. thinly sliced prosciutto
 
6  oz. thinly sliced hot capocollo
 
6  oz. thinly sliced soppressata
 
8  oz. thinly sliced provolone
 
1   cup drained, sliced mild or hot pickled 
peppers
In a small bowl, mix the oregano, oil, lime 
juice, garlic, 1/2 tsp. salt, and 1/4 tsp. pepper. 
Cover and refrigerate for at least 2 hours (the 
flavor improves as it sits, and it will keep for up 
to 1 week).
Halve the ciabatta loaf lengthwise. Rewhisk 
the sauce and pour over the cut sides of the 
bread, spreading evenly with a knife. Line 
the bottom half with the lettuce, then top 
with the prosciutto, capocollo, soppres
sata, and provolone. Scatter the peppers 
over the cheese and cover with the top of 
the ciabatta. Smush together, cut crosswise 
into 6 sandwiches, and wrap each in foil or 
waxed paper. Let sit for a few hours at room 
temperature to let the flavors meld.
—Joanne Chang
Why make it  
on vacation? 
This “sitting sandwich” is 
great picnic fare because 
it only gets better as it 
sits. Pack it at the bot
tom of the basket so any 
weight on top will com
press it, making it easier 
to eat.
46  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 47 ---
summer fruit cobbler
A cobbler made with juicy, fresh fruit, served warm from the oven and topped with 
vanilla ice cream is an iconic dessert, and this one could not be easier to make.  
Serves 6 to 8
 
4  oz. (8 Tbs.) unsalted butter, cut  
into 8 pieces
 41/2  oz. (1 cup) unbleached all-purpose flour
 
1 cup granulated sugar
 11/2 tsp. baking powder 
 
 Pinch kosher salt
 
1 cup whole  milk
 
3  cups mixed whole or sliced fresh summer 
fruit, such as blackberries, blueberries, 
raspberries, peaches, plums, and  
nectarines
 
 Vanilla ice cream for serving
Position a rack in the center of the oven 
and heat the oven to 375°F. Put the butter in 
3 quart baking dish or similar, or in a 10 to  
12 inch ovenproof skillet and put the dish or 
pan in the oven to melt the butter while the 
oven is heating.
Meanwhile, stir or whisk the flour, sugar, 
baking powder, and salt in a medium bowluntil 
well combined. Add the milk and stir or whisk 
until combined; a few small lumps are OK. 
When the butter is fully melted, take the bak
ing dish out of the oven and pour the batter 
over the melted butter; do not mix. Scatter 
the fruit over the batter, favoring the middle of 
the dish more than the edges; do not mix it in. 
Bake until the top is a rich golden brown, 30 to 
45 minutes. Serve warm with vanilla ice cream. 
—Joanne Smart
Joanne Smart is a senior editor  
at Fine Cooking.  
See a slideshow of more recipes 
that are perfect for vacation cook
ing at FineCooking.com/extras.
Why make it  
on vacation?
You can bake this cob
bler in whatever dish or 
pan you have, from a 
3 quart casserole to a 
large skillet. Mix the dry 
ingredients in a zip top 
bag before you leave 
home and you’ll be 
able to pull the cobbler 
together in no time.
Food styling by Ronne Day
F i n eCOOKi n g .COm  47

--- Page 48 ---
How to grill six summer favorites, 
and 18 simple ways to serve them.  BY J U D I T H F E RT I G
most people equate grilling with meat, but not 
me. My favorite foods for the grill come from the 
garden. Now, don’t get me wrong—I love a grilled 
burger or rib-eye just as much as the next omnivore. 
But for me, something truly wonderful happens 
when fresh, raw vegetables meet the sear and sizzle 
of the grill. Their colors intensify. Their sugars 
caramelize. And I’ve even found that grilled vegeta-
bles keep their vibrant color and ﬂ avor for a few days 
after grilling, so they make wonderful leftovers that 
you can dress up any which way. 
I like to overbuy on my favorites—bell peppers, 
corn, summer squash, eggplant, portobellos, and 
nions—then grill them all and stash what we don’t 
at the ﬁ rst night in the fri ge for meals later in the 
eek. It’s a great way to get a head start on dinner, 
nd over the years, I’ve come up with lots of quick 
nd delicious ways to serve the leftovers. On the 
ollowing pages, I’ll show you how to grill all of my 
avorites, and share my recipes for using them in 
verything from main dishes and sides to appetizers 
nd sandwiches. You’ll see: garden + grill = delicious.
from garden 
o g ill
How to grill six summer favorites,
and 18 simple ways to serve them. BY J U D I T H F E RT I G
most people equate grilling with meat, but not
me. My favorite foods for the grill come from the
garden. Now, don’t get me wrong—I love a grilled
burger or rib-eye just as much as the next omnivore.
But for me, something truly wonderful happens
when fresh, raw vegetables meet the sear and sizzle
of the grill. Their colors intensify. Their sugars
caramelize. And I’ve even found that grilled vegeta-
bles keep their vibrant color and ﬂ avor for a few days
after grilling, so they make wonderful leftovers that
you can dress up any which way.
I like to overbuy on my favorites—bell peppers,
corn, summer squash, eggplant, portobellos, and
onions—then grill them all and stash what we don’t
eat the ﬁ rst night in the fridge for meals later in the 
week. It’s a great way to get a head start on dinner,
and over the years, I’ve come up with lots of quick
and delicious ways to serve the leftovers. On the
following pages, I’ll show you how to grill all of my 
favorites, and share my recipes for using them in
everything from main dishes and sides to appetizers
and sandwiches. You’ll see: garden + grill = delicious.
from garden 
to grill
g
t
ill
g
48  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 49 ---
Prep (after prepping, brush or toss with 
olive oil and season with salt and pepper)
Shuck and remove silks
Trim and slice lengthwise ½  inch thick
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½  inch thick rounds
Wipe clean with a damp tow l, stem, 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Corn
Eggplant
Summer squash
Sweet bell peppers
Onions
Portobellos
Grill temp 
(direct heat)
Medium high 
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium high 
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium high
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium high 
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium
(350°F to 375°F)
 
 
(425°F to 450°F)
Method and timing
Grill, turning often, for 8 to 10 minutes 
Grill for 3 minutes, flip, and grill for 
2 minutes more
Grill for 2 minutes, flip, and grill for
 1 to 2 minutes more
Grill skin side down for 5 minutes, flip, 
and grill for 2 minutes more
Grill for 7 to 8 minutes, flip, and grill for 7 to 
8 minutes more; stack on a large piece of foil, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for 2 to 3 minutes more
Grilling vegetables couldn’t be easier because nature has done 
half of the work for you, producing sweet, crisp veggies at their 
peak of freshness. The cooking times on the chart below will yield 
crisp tender bell peppers and corn, supple eggplant and summer 
squash, and tender portobellos and onions, but feel free to cook 
the vegetables less or more, as you prefer. 
Grilled vegetables, done right
Prep (after prepping, brush or toss with
olive oil and season with salt and pepper)
Shuck and remove silks
Trim and slice lengthwise ½  inch thick
Trim and slice lengthwise ¼  inch thick
Quarter lengthwise, stem, and seed
Trim, peel, and slice crosswise into
½  inch thick rounds
Wipe clean with a damp towel, stem,
and scrape out gills with a table knife
Corn
Eggplant
Summer squash
Sweet bell peppers
Onions
Portobellos
Grill temp
(direct heat)
Medium high
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium high
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium high
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium high
(425°F to 450°F)
Medium
(350°F to 375°F)
Medium high
(425°F to 450°F)
Method and timing
Grill, turning often, for 8 to 10 minutes
Grill for 3 minutes, flip, and grill for
2 minutes more
Grill for 2 minutes, flip, and grill for
1 to 2 minutes more
Grill skin side down for 5 minutes, flip,
and grill for 2 minutes more
Grill for 7 to 8 minutes, flip, and grill for 7 to
8 minutes more; stack on a large piece of foil,
wrap, and let sit for 10 minutes to soften further
Grill gill side up for 3 minutes, flip, and grill
for 2 to 3 minutes more
Grilling vegetables couldn’t be easier because nature has done
half of the work for you, producing sweet, crisp veggies at their
peak of freshness. The cooking times on the chart below will yield
crisp tender bell peppers and corn, supple eggplant and summer
squash, and tender portobellos and onions, but feel free to cook 
the vegetables less or more, as you prefer.
Grilled vegetables, done right
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  49

--- Page 50 ---
corn
grilled corn planks with 
tarragon crème fraîche
Do your best to cut the corn kernels 
from the cob in connected planks, but 
know that the dish will be delicious even 
if you don’t. Serve with grilled, fried, or 
roasted chicken.  Serves 4 
In a medium bowl, whisk 13 cup crème 
fraîche, 2 Tbs. chopped fresh tarragon,
2 tsp. tarragon or white wine vinegar, ¼ tsp. 
kosher salt, and ¼ tsp. freshly ground black 
pepper. Using a serrated knife, cut the ker
nels from 4 ears grilled corn, keeping them 
in planks as much as possible; transfer to a 
serving dish. Drizzle the sauce over the corn 
and serve.
thai-style 
grilled corn soup
Grilled sweet corn and Thai red curry 
paste pair with coconut milk and lime 
juice in this refreshing summer soup; 
serve it hot or cold.  Serves 4 
In a medium saucepan, whisk 2 cups lower-
salt chicken broth, one 14 oz. can light 
coconut milk, and 1 Tbs. red curry paste
(more to taste) over medium high heat until 
smooth and simmering, about 2 minutes. 
Add the kernels from 2 ears of grilled corn
and simmer, stirring occasionally, until hot, 
about 3 minutes. Off the heat, stir in 2 Tbs. 
fresh lime juice, 1 Tbs. fish sauce, 1 Tbs. 
finely grated lime zest, and ¼  tsp. kosher 
salt. Serve garnished with 2 Tbs. chopped 
fresh cilantro and some thinly sliced fresh
hot red chile.
grilled corn and orzo 
salad with basil
Great at room temperature, this zesty 
pasta salad is perfect for a picnic, 
potluck, or buffet. It’s versatile, too—any 
small pasta works well, and you can 
swap out the basil for fresh parsley or 
cilantro, if you like.  Serves 4 
Cook 1 cup dried orzo in boiling salted water 
according to package directions until al 
dente. Drain and transfer to a medium bowl. 
Stir in the kernels from 2 ears of grilled corn,
½ cup finely chopped fresh basil, 3 Tbs. 
extra-virgin olive oil, 1 Tbs. fresh lime juice,
½  tsp. kosher salt, and ¼ tsp. hot sauce.
Season to taste with more kosher salt and hot 
sauce. Serve warm or at room temperature. 
(The salad can be made up to 2 hours ahead 
and kept at room temperature.)
50  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13
Pho to gra p hs by Sc ott P hillip s

--- Page 51 ---
eggplant
lebanese grilled 
eggplant dip
Serve this rich, smoky dip with pita 
chips, crackers, or crudités. If you don’t 
have any za’atar (a Middle Eastern 
spice blend), you can substitute ¼   tsp. 
dried thyme.  Yields 2 cups; serves 4
Put 6 slices grilled eggplant, ¼ cup tahini,
¼ cup Greek yogurt, 3 Tbs. fresh lemon juice,
1 Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil, 1 tsp. minced 
garlic, ½  tsp. kosher salt, and ¼ tsp. za’atar in 
a food processor. Pulse until well combined; 
there should be very small pieces of eggplant 
visible. Season to taste with more salt and let 
sit for at least 15 minutes before serving to 
let the flavors meld. Garnish with a sprinkle of 
Aleppo pepper or paprika. (The spread can 
be made and refrigerated up to 1 day ahead. 
Return to cool room temperature to serve.)
grilled eggplant 
noodle bowl
Made with rice noodles, this one-bowl 
meal is hearty without being heavy. If 
you don’t like peanuts, use cashews 
instead.  Serves 4
Cook 7 oz. flat, wide (pad thai) rice noodles
in boiling water according to package direc
tions until tender. 
Meanwhile, combine 6 slices grilled 
eggplant, cut into ½  inch pieces, and 2 sliced 
scallions in a large bowl. In a small bowl, whisk 
¼  cup warm water, ¼  cup mirin, 3 Tbs. soy 
sauce, and 1 tsp. Asian sesame oil.
Drain the noodles, rinse under cold 
running water, drain again, and add to the 
eggplant. Toss with the sauce, 1 Tbs. chopped 
fresh mint, and 1 Tbs. chopped fresh 
cilantro. Sprinkle with 2 Tbs. chopped salted 
peanuts and serve.
grilled eggplant rolls 
with feta and olives
Luscious grilled eggplant slices filled 
with tangy feta, briny olives, and fresh 
herbs make an elegant yet easy sum-
mer starter or light dinner.  Serves 2 as 
a main dish or 6 as an appetizer
In a small bowl, combine ½ cup crumbled 
feta, 2 Tbs. chopped pitted Kalamata 
olives, and 2 Tbs. chopped mixed fresh 
herbs (such as chives, parsley, and basil). 
Spread 6 slices grilled eggplant on a work 
surface. Put 1 heaping Tbs. of the feta 
mixture at the wider end of each slice and 
then tightly roll up. Arrange the rolls seam 
side down on a platter and finish with a little 
extra-virgin olive oil, freshly ground black 
pepper, and more chopped fresh herbs.
Food styling by Ronne Day
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  51

--- Page 52 ---
bell peppers 
grilled pepper 
panzanella
This bread salad gets a double dose 
of smoky flavor from grilled peppers 
and grilled bread. It’s delicious for 
lunch or a light supper with fish or 
chicken.  Serves 4 
Split a 5 inch long piece of day old cia-
batta bread lengthwise. Brush lightly with
extra-virgin olive oil and grill (or broil) until 
toasted. Cut into ¾  inch cubes and trans
fer to a medium bowl. Stir in 2 cups halved 
cherry tomatoes and ¼  cup chopped 
fresh basil. Add 12 grilled bell pepper 
quarters (from 3 whole peppers) cut into 
1 inch pieces. In a small bowl, whisk ¼ cup 
extra virgin olive oil, 1 Tbs. fresh lemon 
juice, 1 medium clove minced garlic, ¼ tsp. 
kosher salt, and ¼ tsp. freshly ground black 
pepper. Drizzle over the salad and toss to 
combine. Season to taste with more salt 
and pepper and let stand for 20 minutes 
before serving so the flavors meld.
spanish-style 
grilled pepper 
potato salad
Grilled sweet bell peppers and lots 
of fresh garlic make this otherwise 
typical potato salad extraordinary.  
Serves 6
Halve (or quarter if large) 2 lb. red or yellow 
baby potatoes; put in a 4 quart pot with 
1 tsp. kosher salt and enough cool water to 
cover. Boil over high heat, partially covered, 
until just tender, about 8 minutes. Drain 
and transfer to a large bowl. Add 12 grilled 
bell pepper quarters (from 3 whole pep
pers) cut into bite size pieces. In a small 
bowl, combine ½ cup mayonnaise, 2 Tbs. 
chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley, and 1 Tbs. 
minced garlic. Add to the potato mixture 
and toss to coat. Season to taste with ko-
sher salt and freshly ground black pepper. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 
pork tenderloin 
with spicy grilled 
pepper relish
Round out this quick sweet-and-spicy 
pork dinner with white rice.  Serves 6
Prepare a medium high (425°F to 450°F) gas 
or charcoal grill fire.
In a small bowl, combine 1 Tbs. five-spice 
powder, 2 tsp. kosher salt, and 1 tsp. freshly 
ground black pepper. Lightly brush 2 pork 
tenderloins (12 to 16 oz. each) with olive oil,
then sprinkle with the spice mixture. Grill, 
turning a quarter turn every 3 to 4 minutes, 
until an instant read thermometer inserted 
in the thickest part registers 140°F to 145°F, 
15 to 18 minutes. Let rest for 5 minutes. 
In a medium bowl, combine 2 Tbs. plain 
rice vinegar, 1 tsp. chili garlic sauce, 1 tsp. 
packed dark brown sugar, and 1 small clove 
garlic that’s been mashed to a paste. Stir in 
8 thinly sliced grilled bell pepper quarters
(from 2 whole peppers) and 2 thinly sliced 
medium scallions.
Cut the pork crosswise on a diagonal into 
½  inch thick slices and serve with the relish.
52  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 53 ---
summer squash
grilled zucchini panini
Sourdough gives this pressed sand-
wich delicious tang, but you can use 
ciabatta or another rustic loaf, too.  
Serves 4
In a small bowl, mix 1 cup whole-milk ricotta, 
1 tsp. finely grated lemon zest, ¾  tsp. freshly 
ground black pepper, and ½  tsp. kosher 
salt. Spread four ½  inch thick slices of 
sourdough bread with the ricotta mixture, 
top each with 3 to 4 slices grilled zucchini, 
and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Top with 
4 more slices of the bread. Brush both sides 
of the sandwiches with extra-virgin olive 
oil and grill in a hot panini press until crisp 
and golden brown, about 4 minutes. (Alter
natively, cook in a 12 inch heavy duty skillet 
over medium high heat for 2 to 3 minutes 
on each side.) 
grilled zucchini with 
spicy peanut sauce
Zucchini takes on smoky, nutty flavors 
when grilled, making it a delicious 
partner for the spicy, satay-inspired 
peanut sauce. If you have any leftover 
sauce, try it with noodles or shrimp.  
Serves 4
In a 1 quart saucepan, cook 1 Tbs. red 
curry paste over medium heat, stirring, 
until fragrant, 1 to 2 minutes. Whisk in ¾  cup 
coconut milk, ¼   cup chunky natural peanut 
butter, and 2 tsp. fish sauce until well com
bined. Off the heat, stir in ¼  cup chopped 
fresh cilantro and 1 Tbs. fresh lime juice. 
Arrange 12 to 16 slices of grilled zucchini 
on a platter, drizzle with some of the sauce, 
and serve, passing the remaining sauce at 
the table. 
grilled straw and 
hay fettuccine
In this riff on a classic Italian dish, thin 
strips of grilled summer squash and 
zucchini represent the traditional yel-
low (straw) and green (hay) fettuccine.  
Serves 4
Cook 8 oz. dried fettuccine in boiling salted 
water according to package directions until 
al dente. 
Meanwhile, cut 12 slices grilled zucchini 
and summer squash on a sharp diagonal 
into ¼  inch thick strips. Drain the pasta, 
return it to the pot, and add the squash,½  cup 
finely grated Parmigiano-Reggiano, ½  cup 
heavy cream, and 1 clove minced garlic. 
Gently toss over low heat until combined. 
Season to taste with kosher salt and freshly 
ground black pepper. Serve with more grated 
Parmigiano at the table, if you like. 
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  53

--- Page 54 ---
onions
grilled onion 
and sage ﬂ atbread
Serve this easy-to-make flatbread as 
a hearty appetizer or for lunch or din-
ner with a salad and soup.  Serves 8
Generously coat a 9x13 inch rimmed 
baking sheet with extra-virgin olive oil.
Oil your hands, then evenly press 1 lb. 
room temperature pizza dough onto the 
sheet all the way to the corners. Using your 
knuckles, make dimpled depressions in the 
top of the dough. 
In a small bowl, mix 2Tbs. extra-virgin 
olive oil with 1tsp. kosher salt and 1tsp. 
water; brush the dough with the mixture. 
In a medium bowl, toss 12finely chopped 
fresh sage leaves and 6 coarsely chopped 
slices grilled onion with 1Tbs. extra virgin 
olive oil. Top the dough with the onion 
mixture. Bake in the center of a 450°F oven 
until the flatbread is browned and the onions 
are slightly browned on the edges, 20to 
25 minutes. Season to taste with salt and 
freshly ground black pepper, slice, and serve.
grilled onions with 
thyme and cream
These creamy onions are a decadent 
topping for a burger or grilled steak.  
Serves 4
In a small bowl, combine ½ cup heavy cream,
1 tsp. minced garlic, 1 tsp. chopped fresh 
thyme, ¼ tsp. kosher salt, and ¼ tsp. freshly 
ground black pepper. Arrange 12 slices 
grilled onion in a snug single layer in 1 large or 
2 small shallow baking dishes. Drizzle with the 
cream mixture. Bake in the center of a 350°F 
oven until hot, about 10 minutes.
grilled onion 
and gorgonzola dip
This tangy dip is just as tasty with 
potato chips or crudités. Leftovers 
are great on sandwiches or baked 
potatoes.  Serves 8
Pulse 4 slices grilled onion in a food proces
sor until coarsely chopped. Add ½  cup Greek 
yogurt, ¼  cup mayonnaise, 2 oz. crumbled 
Gorgonzola, 1 Tbs. fresh lemon juice, 1 tsp. 
minced garlic, 2 to 3 dashes hot sauce, ½  tsp. 
kosher salt, and ¼  tsp. freshly ground black 
pepper; pulse until combined but still chunky. 
Transfer to a serving bowl, cover, and chill for 
at least 1 hour. Garnish with snipped fresh 
chives before serving. (The dip can be made 
and refrigerated up to 1 week ahead. Return 
to cool room temperature to serve.)

--- Page 55 ---
portobellos
garlicky grilled 
portobellos with 
breadcrumbs
Toasted breadcrumbs and a lemon-
garlic dressing make a flavorful topping 
for meaty grilled portobellos. Serve as 
an appetizer or vegetarian main course 
with a salad.  Serves 2 as a main course or 
4 as an appetizer
In a small bowl, toss ½  cup very coarse fresh 
breadcrumbs with 1 Tbs. extra-virgin olive 
oil; bake on a small rimmed baking sheet in 
the upper third of a 350°F oven, stirring 
occasionally, until golden, about 7 minutes. 
In an 8 inch skillet, cook 3 Tbs. extra virgin 
olive oil and 1½ Tbs. minced garlic over 
medium low heat, stirring occasionally, until 
the garlic is golden, about 2minutes. Add 2Tbs. 
dry white wine and 1 Tbs. fresh lemon juice
and simmer vigorously over medium heat for 
1 minute. Off the heat, stir in 2 Tbs. finely 
chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley, ½  tsp. kosher 
salt,and a pinch of crushed red pepper flakes.
Arrange 4 warm grilled portobellos cap 
side down on a plate. Sprinkle with the dress
ing and the breadcrumbs and serve.
grilled portobello bisque
This fresh take on cream of mushroom 
soup gets deep flavor from grilled 
mushrooms, sun-dried tomato paste, 
and a dash of brandy.  Serves 4
In a 3 quart saucepan, cook ½ cup finely 
chopped yellow onion in 2 Tbs. unsalted 
butter over medium high heat, stirring 
often, until golden, 3 to 5 minutes. Add 2 Tbs. 
sun-dried tomato paste and cook, stirring, 
for 1 minute, then whisk in 1 cup lower-salt 
chicken broth and 4 finely chopped grilled 
portobellos. Purée in a blender until smooth. 
Return to the pot, add 1½ cups half-and-half 
and stir over medium heat until hot, about 
5 minutes. Add 2 Tbs. brandy and kosher salt 
and freshly ground black pepper to taste. 
Serve garnished with snipped fresh chives 
and a few drops of Asian chile oil, if you like.
grilled portobello 
quesadillas
Pepper Jack cheese gives these que-
sadillas a spicy kick, but you can use 
Monterey Jack if you prefer less heat.  
Yields 2
Slice six grilled portobellos ½ inch thick. 
Thinly slice 4 medium whole scallions, grate 
4 oz. pepper Jack cheese (1 cup), and crum
ble 2 oz. feta cheese (½  cup). Put a 10 inch 
flour tortilla in a 12 inch skillet over medium 
heat. Sprinkle the tortilla with half of the 
portobellos, scallions, and cheeses. Top with 
another flour tortilla and lightly press down 
with a metal spatula. Cook, flipping once, until 
browned on both sides, 2 to 4 minutes per 
side. Transfer to a plate. Repeat, using two 
more flour tortillas. Slice the quesadillas into 
wedges and serve. 
Judith Fertig is an award-winning author with 
more than 15 cookbooks to her name, including 
The Gardener & The Grill: The Bounty of the 
Garden Meets the Sizzle of the Grill.  
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  55

--- Page 56 ---
The first time I spied a steak labeled “Denver” at my 
supermarket I figured it was part of a marketing scheme 
simply renaming the same old cut of beef. Turns out, 
though, that the Denver steak is actually new to the market, 
and it’s tender and delicious to boot. 
The Denver, and other new beef cuts, resulted from an 
extensive study conducted at the Universities of Nebraska 
and Florida for the United States beef industry. The goal of 
the study? To identify muscles from the chuck (shoulder) 
and the round (hind leg) traditionally sources for tough 
cuts best suited for slow cooking that when cut a specific 
way would yield meat tender enough to be steak like and 
perfect for the grill or sauté pan. 
The Denver steak, the flat iron steak, and the shoulder 
petite tender are the most tender of these new cuts. All 
come from the chuck, which is more routinely turned into 
ground beef for burgers and Bolognese or sold as pot 
roasts. In the study’s ranking of tenderness for all kinds of 
Full-flavored and tender, these inexpensive steaks  
will change the way you think about beef.   
by Ly n n e C u r r y
The Kindest Cuts
Flat Iron Steak
(top blade steak; 
shoulder top blade)
56  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e p T 2 0 13

--- Page 57 ---
beef cuts, the flat iron came in second overall, with only 
filet mignon ahead of it. The Denver placed fourth, just  
behind rib eye, and the petite tender ranked a respect
able seventh place out of 40. 
Tenderness, however, is just one of the attributes of 
these new steaks. Well marbled and boneless, they pack 
a lot of flavor and are generally priced lower than their 
cousins cut from the rib, loin, and flank.
Because they’re relatively new to the market, these 
steaks can be difficult to find. Of the three, the flat iron 
was the first to be extensively promoted and so is the one 
you’ll most likely come across. If you have trouble finding 
any of them, each of the recipes that follow also includes 
a more commonly available substitution. But given the 
beefy nature, supple texture, and lower price tag of these 
new cuts, they’re definitely worth seeking out. If your 
butcher doesn’t carry them, ask for them. Your palate 
(and your pocketbook) will thank you.
Shoulder  
Petite Tender
(petite chuck 
tender roast; bistro 
filet; teres major)
Denver Steak 
(underblade steak; 
underblade center)
f I n ecOOkI n g .c Om  57
Photo g raph s by S cot t P h i l l i p s

--- Page 58 ---
seared carpaccio style 
shoulder petite tender
Quick-pickled shallots give thin, silky 
slices of meat (and the accompany-
ing spinach salad) a tangy punch. 
A good substitute for petit tender is 
the similarly shaped beef tenderloin. 
Serves 4 as an appetizer
 
1 8- to 10-oz. shoulder petite tender 
 
 Kosher salt
 
1/4   cup plus 1 Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil
 
2   medium shallots, halved through the 
root and very thinly sliced lengthwise 
(about 1 cup)
 
1/4   cup Champagne or white wine vinegar
 
4   oz. baby spinach (4 packed cups) 
 
  Flaky sea salt, such as Maldon, and 
freshly ground black pepper
Pat the petite tender dry and season 
it all over with 1/2 tsp. kosher salt.
Heat 1 Tbs. of the oil in a heavy duty 
10 inch skillet over high heat until shim
mering hot. Add the petit tender and sear 
on all sides, 4 to 5 minutes total. Transfer 
to a cutting board and cool to room tem
perature; cut crosswise into 20 slices.
grilled denver steak and 
tomatoes with caper
mustard vinaigrette
A bold and briny vinaigrette acts as 
both marinade and sauce for beefy 
grilled steak. Serve with garlic-
rubbed grilled bread and a green 
salad, if you like. If you can’t find 
Denver steak, substitute top sirloin 
or New York strip.  Serves 4
 
3  Tbs. red wine vinegar
 
2  medium cloves garlic, minced
 
1  Tbs. Dijon mustard
 
1/2  tsp. anchovy paste
 
1/2  cup extra-virgin olive oil
 
2   Denver steaks (about 8 oz. each)
 
  Kosher salt and coarsely ground  
black pepper 
 11/2  lb. firm-ripe tomatoes (about  
3 large), sliced 1/2 inch thick
 
2  Tbs. capers, rinsed and drained
 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley
In a small bowl, combine the vinegar, 
garlic, mustard, and anchovy paste. 
Slowly whisk in the oil.
Put the steaks in a glass or ceramic dish
large enough to hold them in a single 
layer. Reserve 1/4 cup of the vinaigrette 
and pour the rest evenly over the steaks. 
Cover and refrigerate for at least 2 and 
up to 24 hours. (Refrigerate the reserved 
marinade if not using within a few hours. 
Return to room temperature before 
using.) About 45 minutes before serving, 
remove the steaks from the refrigerator. 
Prepare a medium-high (400°F) gas or 
charcoal grill fire. Take the steaks out of 
the marinade, letting any excess drip off, 
and season with salt and pepper. Grill for 
4 minutes, flip, and grill until medium rare 
(130°F), about 4 minutes more. Transfer 
to a cutting board to rest for 5 minutes.
Meanwhile, season the tomato slices 
with salt and grill them on one side only 
until grill marks appear, about 3 minutes. 
Using a spatula, transfer them to a plate.
Whisk the capers and parsley into the 
reserved vinaigrette. Cut the steaks 
across the grain into 1/2 inch thick slices 
and serve with the tomatoes and the 
vinaigrette.
58  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e p T 2 0 13

--- Page 59 ---
flat iron steak with 
zucchini, edamame, 
and soba noodles
The deep flavor of flat iron works 
really well with the umami-rich soy 
sauce and sesame oil featured in 
this dish. If you can’t find flat iron, 
substitute rib-eye.  Serves 6
 
 Kosher salt
 
8  oz. dried soba noodles 
 
1  Tbs. Asian sesame oil
 
3/4  cup soy sauce
 
3/4  cup mirin
 
1/4  cup granulated sugar
 
3  1/4-inch-thick slices peeled fresh  
ginger
 
2  medium cloves garlic, peeled
 
2   flat iron steaks (8 to 10 oz. each)
 
1  lb. zucchini (2 medium), cut into 
2-inch  matchsticks
 
1   12-oz. bag frozen shelled edamame, 
thawed (about 2 cups)
 
1   Tbs. chopped pickled ginger (optional)
 
2   small scallions, white and light-green 
parts, thinly sliced (optional)
 
1  Tbs. toasted sesame seeds  (optional)
Bring a large pot of well-salted water to 
a boil and cook the noodles until tender, 
about 4 minutes. Drain well, transfer to a 
large bowl, toss with the sesame oil, cover, 
and keep warm.
Meanwhile, combine the soy sauce, mirin, 
sugar, ginger, garlic, and 1 cup water in a 
10 inch straight sided sauté pan. Bring to 
a boil, and then add the steaks. Turn the 
heat down and simmer gently, flipping 
once, until medium rare (130°F), 12 to 
16 minutes. Transfer the steaks to a cut
ting board, reserving the liquid in the pan. 
Discard the garlic and ginger.
Return the liquid to a boil. Add the 
zucchini and edamame, return to a boil, 
and then lower to a simmer. Cook until 
the vegetables are just tender, about 
2 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, transfer 
the vegetables to the bowl of noodles. 
Toss well, cover, and keep warm. 
Boil the cooking liquid until reduced by 
half, about 5 minutes. 
Thinly slice the steaks across the grain. 
Arrange the noodle mixture on a platter 
or divide it among 6 shallow bowls. Top 
with the beef and the pickled ginger, if 
using. Drizzle some of the sauce over the 
beef and garnish with the scallions and 
sesame seeds, if using. Serve, passing the 
rest of the sauce at the table. 
Lynne Curry is the author of Pure Beef: 
An Essential Guide to Artisan Meat with 
Recipes for Every Cut.  
Put a 2-foot-long piece of plastic wrap 
on the work surface. Lay some of the 
slices on the plastic, leaving 2 to 3 inches 
between each. Top with another piece 
of plastic wrap and pound the slices with 
a meat mallet until paper thin. Repeat 
with the remaining slices. Refrigerate for 
at least 30 minutes before serving. (The 
meat can be pounded up to 1 day ahead; 
refrigerate it rolled up in the plastic wrap.)  
In a small bowl, soak the shallots in the 
vinegar until slightly softened, about 
30 minutes. Transfer 2 Tbs. of the vinegar 
to a small bowl and whisk in the remaining 
1/4 cup oil and a pinch of salt. 
To serve, strain the shallots, discard
ing the remaining vinegar. In a large bowl, 
toss the shallots with the spinach and 
just enough of the vinaigrette to lightly 
coat the leaves. Divide the slices of beef 
among 4 dinner plates, arranging them 
in a single layer with just a little overlap. 
Drizzle with the remaining vinaigrette  
and sprinkle with a pinch of sea salt. 
Mound the spinach next to the beef  
and season the spinach and beef with  
a few grinds of pepper.
Food styling by Ronne Day

--- Page 60 ---
Clockwise from top  
left, Maple-Peach 
Dumplings, Heirloom 
Tomato and Cheese Pie, 
Butter milk Biscuits, 
Sesame-Poppy-Pecan 
Crackers, Cinnamon- 
Raisin-Walnut Pinwheels.
60  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / s e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 61 ---
Biscuits 
& Beyond
it’s my mother in law’s fault that i stopped making proper piecrusts. 
i blame her because during the first Christmas eve i ever spent with 
my future husband’s family, she served her specialty, a traditional 
french-Canadian pork pie called tourtière. the savory spiced filling 
was enveloped by a buttery, meltingly tender crust, which she told me 
was made from biscuit dough. as the story went, many years earlier, 
she’d run out of time to make a pastry dough for her tourtière and had 
used a fast biscuit dough instead. everyone raved, so it became her 
standard. now it’s mine, too.
since then, i’ve used biscuit dough instead of pastry dough for just 
about everything. not only is it buttery and flaky, as a good piecrust 
should be, but it takes less time to make because there’s no chilling or 
resting required before you bake it. and biscuit dough doesn’t shrink 
when baked, as pastry dough can.
Biscuit dough is endlessly versatile: i roll it very thin to make crack-
ers, wrap it around peaches for a summertime riff on apple dump-
lings, fill it with cinnamon-sugar and nuts and roll it up into pinwheels, 
and even use it as a tender crust for a savory tomato pie. of course, i 
still turn biscuit dough into biscuits, but following my mother-in-law’s 
lead, why stop there?
Five delicious treats from 
one versatile dough.
b y R uth Co u s i n e a u
photo g raph s by scot t p h i l l i p s

--- Page 62 ---
buttermilk biscuit dough
This versatile dough comes together in minutes and can be 
used to make not only biscuits but many other tasty treats, 
too, depending on how you roll and cut it—see the follow-
ing pages for more recipes. Buttermilk has a tendency to 
separate a bit in the carton, so be sure to shake it well before 
measuring.  Yields about 1 lb. dough
 
8 oz.   (13/4 cups) unbleached all-purpose flour; more as needed
 
2  tsp. baking powder
 
1  tsp. granulated sugar
 
1/2  tsp. baking soda
 
1/2  tsp. table salt
 
3   oz. (6 Tbs.) cold unsalted butter, cut into 1/2-inch pieces
 
3/4  cup cold, well-shaken buttermilk
In a large, wide bowl, combine the flour, baking powder, sugar, baking 
soda, and salt. Using a pastry blender or your fingertips, cut in the butter 
until the mixture resembles coarse meal with some pea size lumps 1 . 
(The flour and butter mixture can be refrigerated in a zip top freezer 
bag for up to 1 week, or frozen for up to 1 month. If frozen, thaw at room 
temperature for 30 minutes before proceeding with the recipe.)
Using a silicone spatula, stir in the buttermilk just until the flour 
mixture is moistened 2 . Do not overmix; the dough should just come 
together, and it will be sticky.
Transfer the dough to a floured work surface and gently knead 6 to 
8 times, dusting lightly with flour if needed to keep it from sticking 3 . 
Shape and bake according to one of the recipes on pp. 63 67.
Gently knead the dough by hand, using as light 
a touch as you can and dusting the dough with 
flour if it’s sticking. Knead just until it’s no longer 
shaggy. You should still see lumps of butter. 
3
Work the butter into the dry ingredients just 
until the mixture looks like coarse cornmeal with 
some pea size lumps of butter remaining. Those 
lumps of cold butter will melt in the oven, releas
ing steam that forms air pockets and creates 
flaky layers in the biscuits. 
1
Stir the buttermilk into the dry ingredients just 
until they’re moistened and come together in a 
mass. Mixing too much at this point will lead to 
tough biscuits.
2
MASTER RECIPE
62  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / s e p T 2 0 13

--- Page 63 ---
buttermilk biscuits
Lightly crunchy on the outside, soft and mellow within, these 
biscuits are equally good at dinner or breakfast.  Yields eight 
2-inch biscuits
1 recipe Buttermilk Biscuit Dough (opposite)
Position a rack in the center of the oven and heat the oven to 450°F. 
Line a large rimmed baking sheet with parchment.
On a floured surface, pat the dough into a 4x8 inch rectangle. Using 
a floured chef’s knife, cut the dough into eight 2 inch square biscuits. 
Carefully transfer the biscuits to the baking sheet, spacing them about 
2 inches apart. 
Bake until golden-brown, 12 to 15 minutes. Let cool on a wire rack until 
warm, about 10 minutes, before serving.
F i n e Cooki n g .Com  63

--- Page 64 ---
As you fold the edge of the dough over the 
tomatoes, pleat it to maintain the round shape 
of the pie. It’s fine if the edge looks ragged that 
just adds to the pie’s rustic appeal.
heirloom tomato and cheese pie
This to-die-for rustic tart (or galette) is ideal for brunch, 
lunch, or a light supper with a green salad. The secret to 
keeping the crust from getting soggy despite all of the juicy, 
ripe tomatoes is to sprinkle a bit of semolina flour under them, 
where it will absorb the juice.  Serves 4 to 6
 
1/4  cup semolina flour 
 
1   recipe Buttermilk Biscuit Dough (p. 62)
 
 All-purpose flour, for rolling
 
3   to 4 medium ripe tomatoes (11/2 lb. total), preferably  
heirloom, cored and sliced crosswise 1/4 inch thick
 
 Kosher salt
 
2   oz. coarsely grated Gruyère (about 2/3 cup  
using the large holes of a box grater)
 
1/3  cup mayonnaise
 
1/4   cup finely chopped mixed fresh herbs,  
such as parsley, basil, and chives
 
1  tsp. finely chopped fresh oregano or marjoram
 
 Freshly ground black pepper
Position a rack in the center of the oven and heat the oven to 425°F. 
Sprinkle a 12x17-inch sheet of parchment with 2 Tbs. of the semo
lina flour. On the semolina, pat the biscuit dough into a 5 inch round. 
Using a floured rolling pin, roll the dough into a 13 inch round, lightly 
dusting with all purpose flour to keep the dough from sticking, 
if necessary. 
Transfer the dough on the parchment to a large 
rimmed baking sheet. Sprinkle the remaining 2 Tbs. 
semolina flour over the dough, leaving a 11/2 inch 
border.
Arrange the tomatoes over the dough in two 
flat, slightly overlapping concentric circles, 
lightly salting each circle as you go. 
Combine the cheese, mayonnaise, herbs, 
and 1/8 tsp. pepper in a small bowl. Dollop in 
generous tablespoons over the tomatoes. 
Fold the dough border over the edges 
of the tomatoes, pleating the dough 
as necessary.
Bake until the crust is golden-
brown and the tomatoes are tender, 
20 to 25 minutes. Let cool on a wire 
rack until warm, about 30 minutes, 
before cutting into wedges and 
serving. You can also serve it at 
room temperature.
64  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S e p T 2 0 13

--- Page 65 ---
sesame-poppy-pecan crackers
These buttery bites are a great quick hors d’oeuvre that goes 
well on a cheese plate, with your favorite dip, or all on their 
own.  Yields 49 crackers; serves 12 to 14
 
 All-purpose flour, for rolling
 
1   recipe Buttermilk Biscuit Dough (p. 62)
 
1   large egg
 11/4  oz. (1/3 cup) finely chopped pecans
 11/2 Tbs. poppy seeds 
 11/2 Tbs. sesame seeds
 
3/4  tsp. kosher salt
Position racks in the upper and lower thirds of the oven and heat the 
oven to 425°F. Line two large rimmed baking sheets with parchment.
On a floured surface, pat the dough into a 5 inch square. Using a 
floured rolling pin, roll the dough into a 14 inch square, lightly dusting 
with flour as you roll to keep the dough from sticking, if necessary.
In a small bowl, beat the egg with 1 Tbs. water. In another small bowl, 
combine the pecans, seeds, and salt. Lightly brush the dough with the 
egg wash, then evenly sprinkle with the nut seed mixture. Using a sharp 
knife, pastry wheel, or pizza cutter, cut the dough into forty nine 2 inch 
squares. Using a spatula, transfer the squares to the prepared sheets, 
arranging them about 1/2 inch apart.
Bake until golden-brown, 18 to 20 minutes, swapping positions and 
rotating the sheets halfway through baking. Transfer to a wire rack to 
cool. (These crackers taste best when freshly made, but they can be 
frozen in an airtight container for up to 3 weeks. Thaw in the refrigera
tor overnight and warm in a 350°F oven for 5 minutes before serving.)
Food styling by Ronne Day
F I n ecookI n g .com  65

--- Page 66 ---
cinnamon-raisin-walnut pinwheels
These buttery, not-too-sweet pinwheels are perfect for a 
weekend breakfast because they come together easily and 
there’s no need to wait for the dough to rise, as with tradi-
tional yeasted cinnamon rolls.  Yields 12 rolls; serves 6 to 8
 
1/2  cup packed light brown sugar
 21/2  oz. (1/2 cup) raisins
 
2  oz. (1/2 cup) chopped walnuts
 
1  tsp. ground cinnamon
 
 All-purpose flour, for rolling
 
1   recipe Buttermilk Biscuit Dough (p. 62)
 
2 oz. (4 Tbs.) melted unsalted butter
Position a rack in the center of the oven and heat the oven to 425°F. 
Line a large rimmed baking sheet with parchment.
In a small bowl, combine the sugar, raisins, walnuts, and cinnamon.
On a floured surface, pat the dough into a 5 inch square. Using a 
floured rolling pin, roll the dough into a 12 inch square. Brush the 
dough with 2 Tbs. of the butter and evenly sprinkle with the sugar 
mixture. Tightly roll up the dough (like a jelly roll), pinching the seam to 
seal it shut. Using a serrated knife, cut the roll crosswise into 12 pieces. 
Arrange the pieces cut side down on the prepared sheet, spacing 
them about 1 inch apart. (Unbaked pinwheels can be wrapped on the 
sheet in plastic and frozen for up to 1 month. Thaw in the refrigerator 
overnight before baking.) 
Bake until puffed and golden-brown, 15 to 18 minutes. Transfer to a 
wire rack and brush with the remaining 2 Tbs. melted butter. Let cool 
until warm, about 10 minutes, before serving. 
Use your fingertips to tightly tuck the edge of 
the dough under itself, then roll up snugly so 
your pinwheels have as many swirls as possible.
66  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ s e p T 2 0 13

--- Page 67 ---
maple-peach dumplings
Don’t have time to make a peach pie? Try these luscious 
dumplings instead. Baking them in maple syrup yields a 
gooey sauce that’s hard to resist.  Serves 6
 
1/2  oz.  (1 Tbs.) unsalted butter, softened 
 
3  large firm-ripe peaches (11/2 lb. total)  
 
1/4  tsp. freshly grated nutmeg
 
3/4   cup pure maple syrup, preferably dark amber or Grade B
 
 Pinch of table salt
 
 All-purpose flour, for rolling
 
1   recipe Buttermilk Biscuit Dough (p. 62)
 
1  Tbs. whole milk
 
1   Tbs. turbinado sugar
 
  Crème fraîche, sour cream, or yogurt, for serving (optional)
Position a rack in the center of the oven and heat the oven to 425°F. 
Smear the butter over the bottom of a 9x13 inch baking dish. 
Using a vegetable peeler in a short zigzag motion, peel the peaches 
from top to bottom. Halve and pit the peaches. Sprinkle the cut sides 
with the nutmeg. 
In a small saucepan, bring the maple syrup, salt, and 3/4 cup water to  
a simmer over low heat, stirring occasionally. 
Meanwhile, on a floured work surface, pat the dough into a 4x6 inch 
rectangle. Using a floured rolling pin, roll the dough into a 12x18 inch 
rectangle, lightly dusting with more flour to keep dough from sticking, if 
necessary. Cut the dough into 6 squares. 
Place a peach half cut side down in the center of each piece of dough. 
Pull the four corners of each piece of dough up and over each peach, 
pinching the edges tightly to seal. Transfer the dumplings to the pre
pared dish in a single layer in two rows, about 1/2 inch apart.
Pour the hot syrup around the dumplings. Brush the  dumplings 
with the milk and sprinkle with the sugar. Bake until the dumplings are 
golden brown, about 25 minutes. 
Let cool in the baking dish on a wire rack until warm, about 15 min
utes, before serving with crème fraîche, sour cream, or yogurt, if using. 
Ruth Cousineau has worked in the test kitchens  
of Eating Well, Woman’s Day, and Gourmet,  
where she was test kitchen director. She is also  
the author of Country Suppers: Simple, Hearty 
Fare for Family and Friends.  
F i n e Cooki n g .Com  67

--- Page 68 ---
I LOVE END-OF-SUMMER TOMATOES. They’re sweeter, softer, 
and more flavorful after soaking up months of heat and sunshine. 
And though it’s hard to beat nature’s handiwork, I’ve developed a 
method of making them sweeter still. 
At Vetri, one of my restaurants in Philadelphia, we roast thick slices 
of ripe tomato in large batches overnight, letting them cook slowly in 
the residual heat of the ovens and then in the warmth of the pilot light. 
In the morning, the tomatoes, which do not completely dry out, look 
wrinkly and lightly caramelized in spots and have a flavor that’s rich, 
deep, and sweet. This tomato “conserva” (see the box opposite for 
why I put conserva in quotes) is delicious on its own as a condiment 
for just about anything grilled, but we also use it as a not-so-secret 
ingredient wherever we want to add intense tomato flavor.
My restaurant technique is easy to duplicate at home: Simply toss 
sliced tomatoes with a little olive oil, garlic, salt, and pepper and 
spread on a baking sheet. Start them in a moderately hot oven and 
then slowly roast until they look like the ones at right—5 to 6 hours 
should do it. You can use whatever tomatoes you like, but meatier 
ones, such as beefsteaks or plums (romas), work really well. 
Some people might suggest that summer is not the time for 
slow-roasting tomatoes—after all, they’re so good raw at this time 
of the year—and that this method should be saved for boosting the 
Chef Marc Vetri’s method makes a good thing even better. 
Slow-Roasted
Summer Tomatoes
68  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13
Pho to gra p hs by Sc ott P hillip s

--- Page 69 ---
You say 
conserva...
Italian cooking aficionados 
might rightfully note that in 
Italy, a tomato conserva is 
more like a tomato paste. 
I call these tomatoes 
“conserva” because their 
texture is like a conserve (a 
whole-fruit jam). The meth-
od is also a way of getting 
another week from really 
ripe tomatoes. And though 
I go through conserva so 
fast that I don’t need to do 
this, you can freeze roasted 
tomatoes for a couple of 
months, “conserving” them 
for winter. 
flavor of lackluster winter tomatoes. I could not disagree more. 
By starting with tomatoes at their best, you get the best tomato 
conserva. Sure, you can make it in January with out-of-season 
tomatoes, but it won’t be nearly as good as the conserva you make 
in summer. Plus, making tomato conserva is a good way to use up 
all those tomatoes from the garden. 
Tomato conserva is endlessly versatile. In the recipes that follow, 
I use it in place of canned tomatoes in classic pasta all’Amatriciana, 
where the conserva’s sweetness plays off the spicy crushed red 
pepper flakes and salty pancetta. I also use it to make a vinaigrette 
that I drizzle over colorful slices of heirloom tomatoes and Burrata 
cheese for the ultimate summer salad. 
Beyond these recipes, tomato conserva is delicious on pizza, over 
polenta, or added to a spinach or bread salad. It’s great on sand-
wiches or alongside them, like a relish. At my more casual restau-
rant, Alla Spina, we serve a tomato conserva as a condiment for our 
Taleggio and roasted pepper grilled cheese. And one of my favorite 
casual suppers consists of topping grilled bread with some tomato 
conserva, fresh goat cheese, chopped thyme, and a fried egg.
I also make a sweeter version of tomato conserva by omitting the 
garlic and sprinkling the tomatoes with some sugar. Sweet tomato 
conserva is fantastic over pound cake, olive oil cake, or ricotta 
cheesecake. I also love it chopped and spooned over olive oil gelato 
or even good old-fashioned vanilla ice cream.  
You’re bound to find your own favorite ways to use tomato con-
serva once you make it yourself (and it’s so easy, there’s no excuse 
not to). Just don’t wait until winter.

--- Page 70 ---
spaghetti with tomato conserva,
pancetta, and pecorino
In this version of the classic Italian pasta dish spaghetti all’Amatriciana, tomato con-
serva delivers deeper tomato flavor than canned tomatoes. If you can get guanciale 
(cured pig cheek), try it instead of pancetta for more pronounced porkiness.  Serves 6
 
 Kosher salt
 
1  lb. dried spaghetti
 
5  Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil
 
4   oz. thinly sliced fatty pancetta, cut into 
½  -inch strips
 
2   cups Tomato Conserva (recipe at left), 
coarsely chopped
 
½    tsp. crushed red pepper flakes
 
2   oz. finely grated aged Pecorino 
Romano (2 cups using a rasp grater)
 
½     cup packed whole flat-leaf parsley leaves
Bring a large pot of well-salted water to a boil. 
 
 
ta for 1 minute less than package 
directions for al dente. Reserve about 1 cup 
of the pasta water and then drain the pasta. 
Meanwhile, heat 3 Tbs. of the oil in a 12-inch 
skillet over medium high heat. Add the pancetta 
and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden
brown, about 3 minutes. 
Add the conserva, red pepper flakes, and ½  cup 
of the pasta water and toss to combine. Add the 
pasta and cook, tossing, until al dente, 1 to 2 min
utes. Turn the heat to medium low and add the 
remaining 2 Tbs. olive oil, half of the pecorino, and 
the parsley. Toss, adding more pasta water, if need
ed, to loosen the sauce. Season to taste with salt 
and serve sprinkled with the remaining pecorino.
In this versio
serva delive
(cured pig c
 Kosher s
1  lb. dried
5  Tbs. extr
4   oz. thinly
½  -inch s
2   cups Tom
coarsely
½    tsp. crus
2   oz. finely
Romano
½     cup pack
Bring a large p
Cook the past
tomato conserva
Delicious in the pasta and 
salad that follow, these 
tomatoes can be added 
to just about any dish that 
wants some rich flavor. 
They need 5 to 6 hours in 
the oven, so plan accord-
ingly.  Yields about 3 cups
 
4   lb. ripe, meaty tomatoes, 
such as beefsteak or plum, 
cored and sliced crosswise 
½   inch thick
 
2  medium cloves garlic, 
smashed and peeled
 
½   cup extra-virgin olive oil
 
  Kosher salt and freshly 
ground black pepper
Position racks in the upper 
and lower thirds of the oven 
and heat the oven to 350°F. 
Divide the tomatoes and garlic 
between two large rimmed 
baking sheets. Drizzle the oil 
over the tomatoes and season 
with 1 tsp. salt and several 
grinds of pepper. Gently toss 
the tomatoes to evenly coat 
with the oil and then  spread in a 
single layer. 
Put the sheets in the oven and 
lower the heat to 225°F. Slowly 
roast, switching the posi
tions of the sheets halfway 
through, until the tomatoes 
look like juicy sun dried 
tomatoes, wrinkly and 
slightly browned in 
spots, 5 to 6 hours. Let 
the tomatoes cool for 
at least 10 minutes 
before serving or using. 
(The conserva can 
be refrigerated in an 
airtight container for up 
to 1 week or frozen for 
up to 2 months.)
70  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG / S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 71 ---
Marc Vetri is the chef/owner of four restaurants in Philadelphia.  
How to 
choose juicy 
tomatoes
You know when you lift a 
potted plant and it’s really 
light, it means the soil is 
dry? It’s the same with a 
tomato. If it’s heavy, then 
it’s nice and juicy, and vice 
versa. So pick one up to feel 
its weight. Then bring it to 
your nose. Even from the 
outside, it should have a 
strong tomato fragrance; 
if not, put it down and keep 
looking. For making con-
serva, you want tomatoes 
that are ripe but not mushy; 
save the mushy ones for the 
saucepot.
heirloom tomato and burrata salad 
with tomato conserva vinaigrette
Tomato lovers, this is for you: sliced ripe tomatoes, creamy Burrata cheese, 
and fresh basil, topped with a tomato conserva and balsamic vinaigrette. 
The vinaigrette is also delicious over grilled fish, eggplant, or zucchini. If 
you can’t find Burrata, substitute sliced fresh mozzarella.  Serves 4
 
¼     cup Tomato Conserva (recipe, opposite), finely chopped
 
¼    cup extra-virgin olive oil
 
1  tsp. red wine vinegar
 
  Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper
 1¼     lb. large ripe tomatoes, preferably heirloom, cored and sliced ½   inch thick
 
8   oz. Burrata (1 large or 2 small balls), quartered or halved to yield 4 pieces
 16  to 20 small whole fresh basil leaves
 
  Flaky sea salt, such as Maldon, for serving
In a small bowl, whisk the conserva with the oil, vinegar, 1 tsp. salt, and ¼  tsp. pepper. 
Arrange the tomato slices and Burrata on 4 salad plates. Scatter the basil leaves 
and drizzle the vinaigrette over the tomatoes and cheese. Sprinkle lightly with sea 
salt and serve.
Food styling, pp. 68-69 by Julissa Roberts, pp. 70-71  by Ronne Day
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  71

--- Page 72 ---
Lobster Rolls
Enjoy the seaside classic or try it as a spicy steamed bun. 
BY JA S P E R WH I T E A N D DA LE TA LD E
Jasper White is a Boston-area chef, restaurateur, and cookbook author who has devoted his career 
to New England cuisine and seafood. His classic New England-style roll, which is packed with 
more than a full lobster’s worth of meat, tastes like summer at a Maine seafood shack.
T H E C L A S S I C
Maine vs. 
Connecticut
This New England, or Maine, 
lobster roll is filled with cold, 
creamy lobster salad. This is 
not to be confused with a Con
necticut lobster roll, in which 
the lobster is served warm and 
dressed with drawn butter.
Split Decision
Split top hot dog buns are a 
New England specialty. They’re 
soft, slightly sweet white bread 
rolls with flat bottoms that can 
stand up under the weight of a 
heap of lobster, and flat crust
less sides perfect for toasting 
on a griddle.
Crunch Time
Finely chopped celery and 
scallions are classic add ins to 
lobster salad. They add crunch 
and a crisp vegetal note to 
contrast with the rich, creamy 
lobster. Cucumbers, though not 
traditional, are a cool, refresh
ing substitute for celery.
Tarragon of Virtue
The anise flavor of fresh tar
ragon is the perfect accent to 
sweet lobster meat. It’s the only 
herb you’ll find at an authentic 
New England lobster shack.
CLASSIC/CLASSIC UPDATE
72  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 73 ---
Two-time Top Chef alum Dale Talde merges Asian ﬂ avors with American classics 
at his three Brooklyn restaurants. He demonstrates that style here with this 
Chinese steamed bun, or bao, ﬁ lled with lobster drenched in spicy butter.
T H E U P D AT E
The Chile Factor
A combination of red Thai 
chiles and Sriracha, a Southeast 
Asian style chili garlic sauce, 
gives the lobster a dose of mild 
heat and bright flavor.
Butter Believe It
Like a Connecticut style lob
ster roll, this update is dressed 
with melted butter. But here, 
the butter is also the cooking 
liquid it’s used to gently poach 
the tender lobster.
Take a Bao
The word bao encompasses 
several types of Chinese 
steamed, filled buns. Bright 
white, incredibly fluffy, and a 
bit tacky to the touch, these 
pocket style bao are a mild 
vehicle for the lobster filling.
Love at First Bite
The heaping, meal size classic 
is reimagined as a hand held 
two bite nibble. It’s the perfect 
appetizer or hors d’oeuvre.
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  73

--- Page 74 ---
t h e c l a s s i c
new england lobster rolls
The contrast between cool, delicious lobster salad and buttery, toasted buns is a 
huge part of a lobster roll’s appeal. For a speedier version, you can substitute 1 lb.  
high-quality precooked lobster meat for the live lobsters.  Serves 4 
¾  cup mayonnaise
 
2  tsp. Dijon mustard
 
1  dash hot sauce, preferably Tabasco
 
1 Tbs. chopped fresh tarragon
 
  Kosher or sea salt 
 
5  1-lb. lobsters (or equivalent)
 
2/3  cup finely diced celery or peeled cucumber 
 
  Freshly ground black pepper 
 
3   small whole scallions, thinly sliced (1/4 cup)
 
2  oz. (1/4 cup) salted butter, softened
 
4  New England-style hot dog buns
 
4   small Boston or Bibb lettuce leaves
In a small bowl, whisk the mayonnaise, 
mustard, hot sauce, and 1 Tbs. cold water; stir 
in the tarragon. Transfer to a small covered 
container and refrigerate. (The dressing may 
be made up to 5 days ahead.) 
Put about 1 inch of well-salted water in a 
16 to 20 quart steamer pot, cover, and bring 
the water to a rolling boil. Meanwhile, kill the 
lobsters (optional; see a video at FineCook 
ing.com/extras).
When the pot fills with steam, put in the 
lobsters: Holding them by the body, arrange 
them two by two on top of each other, facing 
in different directions so the steam can circu
late around them easily. 
Cover the pot and steam the lobsters until 
the shells are bright red and the antennae  
can be easily pulled off, 10 to 12 minutes  
for 1 lb. lobsters, 2 minutes longer for each 
additional ¼ lb. 
Using tongs, transfer the cooked lobsters  
to a rimmed baking sheet and let sit at room 
temperature until they’re cool enough to 
handle. Remove the rubber bands from the 
claws and then remove the meat from the 
shells ( 1 through 4 , below; reserve the 
shells and bodies for making stock, if you 
like see Test Kitchen, p. 87). 
Cut the lobster meat into bite-size pieces.
Combine the lobster and celery or cucumber 
To break down the lobster, first twist the claws 
off, complete with the knuckles that join them to 
the body. Then twist the knuckles off the claws 
and cut the shells open with kitchen shears.
If you don’t have a lobster pick, a bamboo 
skewer works well for pulling meat out of the 
claws including the small “thumbs” and push
ing it out of the knuckles. You can also pull some 
meat out of the thin legs as a cook’s treat.
Bend the tail backward and give it a slight twist 
to separate it from the body. Once the tail is 
removed, it’s easy to cut open the soft underside 
with kitchen shears and remove the meat.  
1
2
3
74  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ s e p T 2 0 13
pho to gra p hs by sc ott p hillip s

--- Page 75 ---
CLASSIC/CLASSIC UPDATE
Like the mud vein on shrimp, the lobster’s intes
tine must be removed. First, clean off any green 
paste (tomalley) sticking to the body end of the 
tail. Then carefully slice the tail in half lengthwise 
to expose the intestine, and gently pull it out. 
with enough dressing to coat (you may not 
need all of the dressing). Season to taste with 
salt and pepper. Cover and refrigerate until 
cold, at least 30 minutes and up to 4 hours 
before serving.
When ready to serve, stir the scallions into 
the lobster salad. Heat a 10 inch skillet over 
medium heat. Spread the butter on the flat 
outsides of the hot dog buns. Toast the buns 
in the skillet, turning once, until golden brown, 
about 3 minutes total. Remove from the heat.
Gently open the buns and place a lettuce 
leaf inside each. Divide the lobster salad 
among the buns and serve.
4
See videos of how to kill a  
lobster and extract the meat  
at FineCooking.com/extras.
Lettuce is controversial 
among lobster-roll  
purists, but it keeps the 
buns from getting soggy.

--- Page 76 ---
t h e u p d at e
chile-butter lobster bao 
The lobster for these fluffy Chinese-style buns is steamed partway and then poached in 
butter, making it that much more rich and luscious. Don’t substitute precooked lobster 
meat for fresh here—it’ll overcook in the butter. If you don’t have a wok and bamboo 
steamer, see Test Kitchen, p. 87, for an alternative.  Yields 16 buns; serves 8 as an appetizer
FOR THE BUNS  
171/4  oz. (3¾ cups) bleached all-purpose flour
1/3 cup granulated sugar
 
½ tsp. baking powder
 
1 cup warm (105°F to 115°F) water  
 
1/4  cup warm (105°F to 115°F) heavy cream 
 1½ tsp. active dry yeast
 
 Vegetable oil as needed
FOR THE LOBSTER
 
 Kosher salt
 
4 1-lb. live lobsters (or equivalent)
 
6 dried Thai red chiles 
 
8 oz. (1 cup) unsalted butter
 
3 Tbs. Sriracha
 
3 Tbs. fresh lemon juice
MaKE THE BUNS
In a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attach
ment, mix the flour, sugar, and baking powder 
at low speed. In a medium bowl, combine the 
water, cream, and yeast and whisk to dissolve. 
Add the wet ingredients to the dry ingredients 
and mix on medium speed until the dough 
comes together, about 10 seconds. Switch to 
the dough hook and mix on medium speed 
until the dough looks smooth and feels tacky, 
3 to 5 minutes. 
Lightly coat a medium bowl with oil and 
transfer the dough to it. Cover with plastic 
wrap and let rest at room temperature for 
30 minutes. 
Divide the dough in half and roll each half into 
a 16 inch long rope. Cut each rope into 8 equal 
pieces 1 . Using your hands, gently flatten each 
piece into a 21/2 x 31/2 inch oval that’s 1/4 inch 
thick 2 . Lightly oil a large rimmed baking sheet. 
Brush the top of each oval with oil, fold in half 
widthwise, and arrange in a single layer on the 
sheet 3 . Cover loosely with plastic wrap and 
set them in a warm spot until puffy and roughly 
doubled in thickness, about 11/2 hours.
PaRcOOK THE LOBSTERS
Steam the lobsters according to the direc
tions on p. 74, but for only 6 minutes the 
lobsters will be cooked just enough to 
remove the meat. Transfer them with tongs 
to a rimmed baking sheet and let sit at room 
temperature until cool enough to handle. 
Remove the meat from the shells following 
steps 1 through 4 on pp. 74 75. Cut the meat 
into bite size pieces. Set aside.
STEaM THE BUNS
Soak the bottom layer of a 2 tiered 10 inch 
bamboo steamer in water for at least 20 min
utes before steaming the buns so that it 
doesn’t burn. 
Fill a 14-inch wok with enough water to 
just touch the bottom edge of the steamer 
(about 4 cups). Bring to a boil. 
Line both tiers of the steamer with rounds 
of parchment that have been perforated in 
several places with a hole punch or skewer. 
Arrange 4 of the buns on each tier of the 
steamer 4 . Put the soaked tier in the wok, 
and stack the second tier on top. Cover and 
steam the buns until they’re puffed up and 
A ruler makes it easy to divide the dough evenly. 
Use a paring knife or bench knife to cut it into 
pieces.
Press each piece of soft dough with your fingers 
to flatten it into an oval. Picking the dough up 
off the work surface to do this gives you more 
control over the shape.
A little oil keeps the folded bun from sticking 
shut. Brush the less smooth side so that once 
the bun is folded, the more attractive side is the 
one you see. 
1
2
3
Food styling by Ronne Day
76  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / S e P T 2 0 13

--- Page 77 ---
CLASSIC/CLASSIC UPDATE
less tacky, about 15 min
utes, checking occasionally to 
make sure the water hasn’t boiled 
away. Transfer the steamed buns to a bak
ing sheet, gently open them, and cover with 
foil. Replenish the boiling water in the wok and 
steam the remaining buns. 
The buns can be served warm or at room 
temperature, but if they’re not going to be 
served within 2 hours, they should be frozen. 
Defrost by steaming or microwaving, covered 
with a damp paper towel, for 30 to 60 seconds. 
Poach The lobsTer meaT
In a 2 to 3 quart saucepan, dry toast the 
chiles over medium heat, stirring occasionally, 
until they darken, 1½ to 2 minutes. Add the 
butter. Once it has melted, add the Sriracha 
and lemon juice. Turn the heat to low, add the 
parcooked lobster meat, and stir occasionally 
until the lobster is just cooked through, 2 to 
3 minutes. Remove from the heat, discard 
the chiles, and season to taste with salt.
assemble The bao
With a slotted spoon, distribute the lobster 
meat among the buns. Serve immediately. 
Lining the steamer with parchment punched 
with holes prevents the buns from sticking to the 
steamer, while allowing the steam to circulate. The 
buns can be placed close together, but be sure 
they aren’t touching, or they will stick together.
Use a slotted spoon to drain 
excess butter from the 
lobster as you assemble 
the bao. save the leftover 
butter for flavoring rice, 
spreading on bread, or 
drizzling over popcorn. It’ll 
keep for 3 days in the fridge 
or 3 months in the freezer.
4
F I n e cOOkI n g .cOm  77

--- Page 78 ---
SERVING 
SUGGESTIONS
TIME
FOOD
5 minutes
In a salad; in a 
Bloody Mary; in salsa; 
in gazpacho
In a salad or salsa; 
to accompany pork, 
duck, or ham; drizzled 
with caramel sauce 
over ice cream
20 minutes cut side up, 
10 minutes cut 
side down
PEACHES,
halved, pitted
To accompany grilled 
meat or fish; in a 
potato salad; to make 
twice-baked potatoes; 
in soup
1 hour, then bake in a 
325°F oven until tender
POTATOES, 
medium to large, whole, 
unpeeled, rubbed with 
butter and salt
CHERRY OR GRAPE 
TOMATOES
As a garnish for bagels 
with cream cheese and 
smoked salmon; 
in deviled eggs; 
tossed with roasted 
vegetables
30 minutes
CAPERS
In egg salad; for deviled 
eggs; in a Cobb or 
Niçoise salad
15 minutes
HARD-COOKED EGGS,
peeled, left whole 
SURFACE
Perforated grill pan
Grill grate
Grill grate
Metal pie plate
Grill grate
TEMP
185°F to 200°F
200°F to 215°F
210°F to 225°F
210°F to 225°F 
200°F to 215°F
WOOD
½   cup 
apple chips
1 cup apple, hickory, 
or peach chips
2 cups 
apple or hickory chips
½   cup 
apple or hickory chips
½   cup 
apple or maple chips
as a barbecue pitmaster, i love smoking meats of all kinds. 
But as a restaurateur, I’ve learned that diners want more than just big 
hunks of meat. Luckily, smoky ﬂ avor translates well to many things—
cheese, shellﬁ sh, fruit, nuts, olives, capers. If you know how to smoke 
meat, you’ll ﬁ nd that the technique for smoking these ingredients is 
similar. Just follow the chart and instructions here to produce surpris-
ingly delicious smoked snacks and accents to main dishes.
WOOD  Diﬀ erent types of wood add distinct ﬂ avors and varying levels of 
smokiness. Maple and alder are mild and sweet. Apple, cherry, and 
peach are also mild and sweet but with fruity notes. Hickory adds a 
stronger ﬂ avor, which is great with foods like capers and nuts.
Adjust the amount of wood chips to control the level of smoke. Besides 
the type of wood, another factor that aﬀ ects the smokiness of the food 
Add smoky flavor to everything from fruit to nuts.  BY LE E A NN WH I P P EN
is how many chips you use. Foods that absorb smoke more readily or 
that will smoke for a short time need fewer, while those with long cook 
times or barriers preventing absorption, like skins or shells, need more.  
Soak the chips for about 30 minutes and then drain before using. 
Otherwise, they will burn rather than smolder and smoke. 
TEMPERATURE  Smoking is achieved over low, indirect heat. Just 
how low that heat should be depends on whether you want the food 
to cook (like scallops and oysters) or just soften slightly to absorb the 
smoke. If you’re smoking a melty ingredient like cheese, the tempera-
ture should be only hot enough to ignite the wood chips. This is called 
cold-smoking.
For a charcoal grill, ignite a chimney starter full of lump charcoal and 
burn until the edges of the coals look ashy. Carefully spread the coals 
10 things you didn’t k  
P ho to gra p hs by Sc ott P hillip s
78  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 79 ---
SERVING 
SUGGESTIONS
TIME
FOOD
TIME
SERVING
On a cheese plate; 
tossed in vegetable 
dishes and salads; 
chopped to coat goat 
cheese for an hors 
d’oeuvre
2 hours
On bruschetta; in 
seafood salad; tossed 
with pasta; on a tomato 
or spinach salad; with a 
bacon beurre blanc
5 minutes per side
FOOD
NUTS,
such as pecans or 
walnuts, whole, shelled
Stuffed with blue 
cheese or anchovies; 
in a martini; 
in puttanesca sauce; 
in tuna or chicken salad
20 minutes
OLIVES,
green or black, 
unpitted 
SEA SCALLOPS,
patted dry
As an hors d’oeuvre 
with butter and lemon;
 in oyster stew; 
in a cream-cheese-
based dip
18 minutes
OYSTERS, 
on the half shell
On sandwiches; in 
macaroni and cheese; 
in a fondue; in cheese 
sauce for broccoli 
or cauliflower
SURFACE
SURFACE
Metal pie plate
Grill grate
Perforated grill pan
Grill grate 
Rack or perforated grill 
pan set over a pan of ice
1½   hours
HARD CHEESE,
such as Monterey Jack, 
Cheddar, or Gruyère
TEMP
E
TEMP
210°F to 225°F
285°F to 300°F
200°F to 215°F
235°F to 250°F
85°F to 100°F
WOOD
WOOD
1 cup 
hickory chips
1 cup cherry and 
½   cup apple chips
1 cup 
apple or maple chips
1 cup 
alder or apple chips
1 cup 
apple or cherry chips
over half of the charcoal grate. (If you’re cold-smoking, ignite half a 
chimney. Use three coals and leave the rest in the chimney set on bricks.) 
Close the lid to let the coals burn down to the desired temperature, 
monitoring with a probe thermometer stuck through the air vent if 
your grill doesn’t have one built in. Scatter the wood chips on the coals.
For a gas grill, ignite one of the burners and close the lid. Let the grill 
heat up to the desired temperature, adjusting the burner setting as 
needed, and then add the wood chips. If your grill has a built-in 
smoker box, use it according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
If not, after-market smoker boxes are available (see page 95 for a 
mail-order source), or you can wrap the soaked chips in a foil packet 
with lots of holes poked on top and place it directly on the lit burner, 
under the grate.
SURFACE  Once the chips are smoking, put the food on the section of 
the grill that doesn’t have coals or a lit burner under it. Items that are 
large enough not to fall through the grate can go directly on it. For 
smaller items, use a perforated grill pan to keep the food from falling 
through the grate while allowing smoke to circulate. For foods so small 
that they would fall through a perforated pan, use a metal pie plate.
TIME  Cover the grill and smoke according to the chart below. 
Try this method once with one of the foods below and you’ll see how 
easy it is. Just don’t blame me if you take up smoking all the time. 
Lee Ann Whippen is an award-winning barbecue pitmaster, grilling expert, 
and chef/partner of Chicago Q restaurant.  
now you could smoke
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  79

--- Page 80 ---
raspberry-balsamic  
semifreddo 
chocolate-hazelnut  
semifreddo 
80  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ s e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 81 ---
A step-by-step guide to making this lush,  
creamy frozen Italian dessert.
b y M ark S c arbrou g h an d bru c e We in St e in
Semifreddo
having written two cookbooks about frozen desserts, 
we’re ready to proclaim which one is the very best. Sorry, gelato and 
ice cream lovers—semifreddo is the winner. A staple in most restau-
rants in Italy, semifreddo is like fluffy, sliceable ice cream, but better. 
We think it’s the richest, most luscious, and probably most decadent 
member of the frozen dessert family.
Meaning “half cold” in Italian, semifreddo maintains a soft, velvety 
texture, even right out of the freezer. Because it contains so much 
sugar and air, it will never freeze into a hard, dense block the way 
ice cream does. And since you don’t need an ice cream maker or any 
other special equipment to make it, it’s easy to whip one up when-
ever the craving strikes.
There are three components to a semifreddo—whipped cream, 
zabaglione, and Swiss meringue. The whipped cream adds richness 
and air to the dessert. The zabaglione, a light and foamy 
Italian sauce of egg yolks, sugar, and flavorings, does 
the same but also lets you change the flavor of 
the semifreddo by adding liqueurs, chocolate, 
fresh herbs, or fruit. Finally, thick, glossy 
Swiss meringue (a mixture of egg whites 
and sugar), adds yet another level of sweet-
ness and loft. Fold those elements to-
gether, freeze in a loaf pan, slice, and 
serve. You’ll swoon, we swear. 
apricot-thyme 
semifreddo 
Recipes of the Region
f i n ecooki n g .com  81

--- Page 82 ---
WHIP THE CREAM
Whipping heavy cream in a chilled bowl with 
chilled beaters keeps it very cold so it can 
reach its loftiest potential. Stop the mixer the 
moment the cream has reached stiff peaks.
MAKE A ZABAGLIONE
Beating the zabaglione ingredients over sim
mering water cooks them gently; don’t let the 
bottom of the bowl touch the water, or the 
eggs may scramble. The zabaglione is done 
when it’s thick and foamy and the beaters 
leave a ribbony trail when you lift them.
MAKE A SWISS MERINGUE
Gently cooking the meringue ingredients 
over the same simmering water streamlines 
the recipe and yields fluffy, glossy results. 
To prevent the eggs from overcooking once 
the meringue is glossy, continue beating it 
off the heat until very thick and billowy, like 
marshmallow fluff.
FOLD TOGETHER
When folding the components together, 
use a large silicone spatula and long, gentle 
strokes to preserve as much air in the mixture 
as possible. Stop as soon as no streaks remain.
ADD SWIRLS
If adding swirls of jam at the end, don’t over
mix lest you lose the effect; just one or two 
long strokes of the spatula should do it.
FREEZE, THEN SERVE
Smoothing any wrinkles on the surface 
of the frozen semifreddo is easy to do 
with a warm knife or small offset spatula.
4
5
3
6
1
2
Semifreddo, step by step
82  fi n e cook i ng • a ug / s e p t 2 0 13
p ho to gra p hs by sc ott p hillip s

--- Page 83 ---
raspberries through a fine mesh sieve into a 
small bowl. Scrape any purée from the bot
tom of the sieve into the bowl and set aside.
Clean and dry the beaters. In a 4 quart 
saucepan, bring 11/2 inches of water to a boil 
over high heat and then lower the heat to a 
gentle simmer. Put the egg yolks, 1/3 cup of  
the sugar, and the Chambord in a medium 
metal bowl and set the bowl over the pan of 
simmering water; make sure the bottom of the 
bowl doesn’t touch the water. Beat on medium 
speed, frequently scraping down the bowl 
with a silicone spatula, until the zabaglione  
is thick, almost doubled in volume, and the 
beaters leave a trail when you lift them 2 , 
about 5 minutes. Remove the bowl from the 
pan and fold the raspberry purée into the 
zabaglione until combined. Set aside. 
Make the Meringue
Clean and dry the beaters. Return the pan to 
the heat and maintain the water at a gentle 
simmer. Put the egg whites, the remaining 
1/3 cup of sugar, the cream of tartar, and salt 
in a large metal bowl and set it over the pan 
of water. Beat on medium speed, occasion
ally scraping down the sides of the bowl with 
a clean silicone spatula, until light, fluffy, and 
raspberry-balsamic semifreddo 
Aged balsamic vinegar is rich and syrupy, a wonderful complement to the tart rasp-
berries in this semifreddo. If you have only regular balsamic on hand, simmer 2 Tbs. 
until reduced by half, cool, and use as directed below. Crème de cassis or raspberry 
syrup can be used instead of the Chambord.  Serves 8
11/2 cups cold heavy cream
 
6 oz. (1 cup) fresh raspberries
 
5 large egg yolks, at room temperature
 
2/3 cup granulated sugar
 
1/4  cup Chambord (black raspberry liqueur)
 
2  large egg whites, at room temperature
 
1/2  tsp. cream of tartar
 
1/4 tsp. table salt 
 
1/4  cup seedless raspberry jam
 
1 tbs. aged balsamic vinegar
thoroughly chill a large metal bowl and the 
beaters of an electric hand mixer. Line the 
bottom and long sides of a 9x5 inch loaf pan 
with a 12x20 inch piece of plastic wrap, leaving 
4 inch overhangs on the long sides. Smooth 
the plastic along the sides and into the cor
ners; it’s OK if there are wrinkles. The plastic 
will not completely cover the short sides.
Whip the CreaM 
Beat the cream in the chilled bowl with the 
chilled beaters on medium high speed just 
until firm peaks form 1 , 1 to 2 minutes.  
Refrigerate.
Make the zabaglione 
Using the back of a wooden spoon, press the 
shiny, about 3 minutes. Remove the bowl 
from the pan and continue beating until the 
meringue is very thick and billowy 3 , about 
2 minutes more.
FolD anD Freeze
In a small bowl, whisk the raspberry jam and 
balsamic vinegar until smooth.
use a silicone spatula to gently fold the 
zabaglione into the meringue and then fold 
in the whipped cream 4 until no streaks re
main. Dollop the jam mixture over the top and 
fold it in with just a few long, gentle strokes to 
create swirls 5 .
Scrape the mixture into the prepared pan
and smooth the top with an offset spatula, 
scraping off excess if necessary to create 
a level top. Wrap the overhanging plastic 
over the top to cover and freeze for at least 
6 hours and up to 3 days. 
unMolD anD Serve
Peel back the plastic wrap from the top of 
the semifreddo. Invert the pan over a cutting 
board or serving platter. Lift off the pan, hold
ing the overhanging plastic down on one side 
and then the other. Remove the plastic wrap. 
If the semifreddo looks wrinkled, warm a long 
knife or small offset spatula under hot run
ning water, wipe the blade dry, and run it over 
the wrinkles to smooth them out 6 . 
Slice the semifreddo crosswise into 1 inch
thick pieces to serve. 
Food styling by Ronne Day
F I n eCOOKI n g .COm  83

--- Page 84 ---
apricot-thyme semifreddo 
Fresh thyme adds herbal notes that complement the apricot in this semifreddo. 
Fresh apricots are too juicy to use here—their juice would freeze into ice crystals 
that would mar the dessert’s smooth texture. Instead, use dried apricots, preferably 
the dark orange California variety for their intense, slightly sour flavor.  Serves 8
 
¼   cup whole milk
 
4  sprigs fresh thyme, plus 1 tsp. chopped 
leaves
 
½    cup dried California apricots
 
1 cup cold heavy cream
 
2 Tbs. apricot preserves
 
4 large egg yolks, at room temperature
 
¼   cup plus 13 cup granulated sugar
 
2 large egg whites, at room temperature
 
½    tsp. cream of tartar
 
¼   tsp. table salt
 
1 tsp. pure vanilla extract
Heat the milk and thyme sprigs in a 1 quart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meanwhile, put the apricots in a medium 
 
 and cover with boiling water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thoroughly chill a large metal bowl and the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ners; it’s OK if there are wrinkles. The plastic 
will not completely cover the short sides.
WHIP THE CREAM
Beat the cream in the chilled bowl with the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAKE THE ZABAGLIONE 
Drain the apricots, transfer them to a food 
processor, add the apricot preserves, and 
process into a coarse purée. Set aside. 
Clean and dry the beaters. In a 4 quart 
saucepan, bring 1½   inches of water to a boil 
over high heat and then lower the heat to 
maintain a gentle simmer. Put the egg yolks, 
¼  cup of the sugar, and the infused milk in a 
medium me al bowl and set the bowl over 
the pan of simmering water; make sure the 
bottom of the bowl doesn’t touch the water. 
Beat on medium speed, frequently scraping 
down the sides of the bowl with a silicone 
spatula, until the zabaglione is thick, almost 
doubled in volume, and the beaters leave 
a trail when you lift them, about 5 minutes. 
Remove the bowl from the pan and fold the 
apricot purée and the chopped thyme into 
the zabaglione until combined. Set aside. 
MAKE THE MERINGUE
Clean and dry the beaters. Return the pan to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOLD AND FREEZE
Use a silicone spatula to gently fold the zaba
glione into the meringue and then fold in the 
whipped cream until no streaks remain.
Scrape the mixture into the prepared pan
and smooth the top with an offset spatula, 
scraping off excess if necessary to create 
a level top. Wrap the overhanging plastic 
over the top to cover and freeze for at least 
6 hours and up to 3 days. 
UNMOLD AND SERVE
Peel back the plastic wrap from the top of 
 
. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Slice the semifreddo crosswise into 1 inch
 
 
 
 
Watch a video of making a semifreddo, 
plus get a bonus recipe for White 
Chocolate and Sour Cherry Semi
freddo at FineCooking.comextras.
apricot-thyme semifreddo
Fresh thyme adds herbal notes that complement the apricot in this semifreddo.
Fresh apricots are too juicy to use here—their juice would freeze into ice crystals
that would mar the dessert’s smooth texture. Instead, use dried apricots, preferably 
the dark orange California variety for their intense, slightly sour flavor. Serves 8
¼   cup whole milk
4  sprigs fresh thyme, plus 1 tsp. chopped
leaves
½    cup dried California apricots
1 cup cold heavy cream
2 Tbs. apricot preserves
4 large egg yolks, at room temperature
¼   cup plus 13 cup granulated sugar
2 large egg whites, at room temperature
½    tsp. cream of tartar
¼   tsp. table salt
1 tsp. pure vanilla extract
Heat the milk and thyme sprigs in a 1 quart 
saucepan over low heat until bubbling around
the edges, about 3 minutes. Cover, remove
from the heat, and let stand for 20minutes to
infuse. Discard the thyme sprigs.
Meanwhile, put the apricots in a medium
heatproof bowl and cover with boiling water
by 1 inch. Set aside to soften for 20 minutes.
Thoroughly chill a large metal bowl and the
beaters of an electric hand mixer. Line the
bottom and long sides of a 9x5 inch loaf pan
with a 12x20 inch piece of plastic wrap, leaving
4 inch overhangs on the long sides. Smooth
the plastic along the sides and into the cor
ners; it’s OK if there are wrinkles. The plastic
will not completely cover the short sides.
WHIP THE CREAM
Beat the cream in the chilled bowl with the
chilled beaters on medium high speed just
until firm peaks form, 1 to 2 minutes. Refrig
erate.
MAKE THE ZABAGLIONE
Drain the apricots, transfer them to a food
processor, add the apricot preserves, and
process into a coarse purée. Set aside.
Clean and dry the beaters. In a 4 quart
saucepan, bring 1½   inches of water to a boil
over high heat and then lower the heat to
maintain a gentle simmer. Put the egg yolks,
¼  cup of the sugar, and the infused milk in a 
medium metal bowl and set the bowl over
the pan of simmering water; make sure the
bottom of the bowl doesn’t touch the water.
Beat on medium speed, frequently scraping
down the sides of the bowl with a silicone
spatula, until the zabaglione is thick, almost
doubled in volume, and the beaters leave
a trail when you lift them, about 5 minutes.
Remove the bowl from the pan and fold the
apricot purée and the chopped thyme into
the zabaglione until combined. Set aside.
MAKE THE MERINGUE
Clean and dry the beaters. Return the pan to
the heat and maintain the water at a gentle
simmer. Put the egg whites, the remaining
13 cup of sugar, the cream of tartar, and salt
n a large metal bowl and set it over the pan
of water. Beat on medium speed, occasion
ally scraping down the sides of the bowl with
a clean silicone spatula, until light, fluffy, and
shiny, about 3 minutes. Remove the bowl
from the pan, add the vanilla, and continue
beating until the meringue is very thick and
billowy, about 2 minutes more.
FOLD AND FREEZE
Use a silicone spatula to gently fold the zaba
glione into the meringue and then fold in the
whipped cream until no streaks remain.
Scrape the mixture into the prepared pan
and smooth the top with an offset spatula,
scraping off excess if necessary to create
a level top. Wrap the overhanging plastic
over the top to cover and freeze for at least
6 hours and up to 3 days.
UNMOLD AND SERVE
Peel back the plastic wrap from the top of 
the semifreddo. Invert the pan over a cutting
board or serving platter. Lift off the pan,
holding the overhanging plastic down on one
side and then the other. Remove the plastic
wrap. If the semifreddo looks wrinkled, warm
a long knife or small offset spatula under hot
running water, wipe the blade dry, and run it
over the wrinkles to smooth them out.
Slice the semifreddo crosswise into 1 inch
thick pieces to serve.
Watch a video of making a semifreddo,
plus get a bonus recipe for White
Chocolate and Sour Cherry Semi
freddo at FineCooking.comextras.
84  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG / S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 85 ---
1 cup cold heavy cream
 
4 large egg yolks, at room temperature
 
½   cup granulated sugar
 
3 Tbs. whole milk
 
4  oz. dark chocolate (70% to 85%), finely 
ground in a food processor (1¼   cups)
 
½   cup Nutella
 
2 large egg whites, at room temperature
 
½    tsp. cream of tartar
 
¼   tsp. table salt
Thoroughly chill a large metal bowl and the 
beaters of an electric hand mixer. Line the 
bottom and long sides of a 9x5 inch loaf pan 
with a 12x20 inch piece of plastic wrap, leaving 
4 inch overhangs on the long sides. Smooth 
the plastic along the sides and into the cor
ners; it’s OK if there are wrinkles. The plastic 
will not completely cover the short sides.
WHIP THE CREAM 
Beat the cream in the chilled bowl with the 
chilled beaters on medium high speed 
just until firm peaks form, 1 to 2 minutes. 
Refrigerate.
MAKE THE ZABAGLIONE 
Clean and dry the beaters. In a 4 quart 
saucepan, bring 1½  inches of water to a boil 
chocolate-hazelnut semifreddo 
Based on the classic pairing of chocolate and hazelnuts, this treat gets its 
hazelnut flavor from Nutella, an Italian hazelnut-cocoa spread available at 
the supermarket. Be sure to use a dark chocolate with at least 70% cocoa 
solids to temper the Nutella’s sweetness.  Serves 8
over high heat and then lower the heat to 
maintain a gentle simmer. Put the egg yolks, 
¼  cup of the sugar, and the milk in a medium 
metal bowl and set the bowl over the pan of 
simmering water; make sure the bottom of 
the bowl doesn’t touch the water. Beat on 
medium speed, frequently scraping down 
the sides of the bowl with a silicone spatula,  
until the zabaglione is thick, almost doubled 
in volume, and the beaters leave a trail when 
you lift them, about 5 minutes. Remove the 
pan from the heat, leaving the bowl over the 
water. Fold the chocolate and Nutella into 
the zabaglione until melted and smooth. Re
move the bowl from the pan and set aside. 
MAKE THE MERINGUE
Clean and dry the beaters. Return the pan to 
the heat and maintain the water at a gentle 
simmer. Put the egg whites, the remaining 
¼  cup of sugar, the cream of tartar, and salt 
in a large metal bowl and set it over the pan 
of water. Beat on medium speed, occasion
ally scraping down the sides of the bowl with 
a clean silicone spatula, until light, fluffy, and 
shiny, about 3 minutes. Remove the bowl 
from the pan and continue beating until the 
meringue is very thick and billowy, about 
2 minutes more.
FOLD AND FREEZE
Use a silicone spatula to gently fold the zaba
glione into the meringue and then fold in the 
whipped cream until no streaks remain.
Scrape the mixture into the prepared pan
and smooth the top with an offset spatula, 
scraping off excess if necessary to create 
a level top. Wrap the overhanging plastic 
over the top to cover and freeze for at least 
6 hours and up to 3 days.
UNMOLD AND SERVE
Peel back the plastic wrap from the top of 
the semifreddo. Invert the pan over a cutting 
board or serving platter. Lift off the pan, 
holding the overhanging plastic down on one 
side and then the other. Remove the plastic 
wrap. If the semifreddo looks wrinkled, warm 
a long knife or small offset spatula under hot 
running water, wipe the blade dry, and run it 
over the wrinkles to smooth them out. 
Slice the semifreddo crosswise into 1 inch
thick pieces to serve. 
Mark Scarbrough and Bruce Weinstein have 
written more than 20 cookbooks, including 
The Ultimate Frozen Dessert Book, The 
Ultimate Ice Cream Book, and their most 
recent, Grain Mains.  
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  85

--- Page 86 ---
PRODUCED BY THE
GOLDEN GATE
RESTAURANT
ASSOCIATION

PRESENTED BY

VISA

SIGNATURE

Foop | wine | spirits | FESTIVAL

YIGIT PURA TYLER FLORENCE ee BRAD FARMERIE

sor FXPERIENCE THE Tickets on sale now!
BEST AT SF CHEFS!
WELLS

FARGO Tastings, Competitions, Demos,
Dinners, Parties and more

© F358 San B
Sane San Francisco Centre cbsSF.com Be inspired ‘Wald ‘Travel’ ALL NEWS)
= fine ANDREW, @
Coédking AAWATEN FREEMAN@/Go, = DPEM eee

--- Page 87 ---
Tips/Techniques/Equipment/Ingredients/Glossary
test kitchen
tip
A better way 
to peel a kiwi
kiwis make a colorful addition 
to fruit salads like the one on 
page 25, but they bruise easily 
if handled too much. To peel 
one without damaging it, you 
can use a knife or a peeler, but 
there’s another tool that leaves 
the peeled fruit smooth and 
rounded instead of beveled. 
Here’s how to peel a kiwi with 
a spoon: Slice off both ends 
with a paring knife. Slide a 
soup spoon under the skin, 
and holding the spoon steady, 
gently turn the kiwi to release 
it from the skin.               
—Julissa Roberts
f i n e cooki n g .com  87

--- Page 88 ---
if you’re making the lobster rolls 
or the lobster bao on pages 74–77, don’t 
throw away your lobster shells. The body 
(also called the carapace) and the rest of 
the shells are a great source of ﬂ avor and 
make a delicious stock. Before you start, 
though, it’s important to know which parts 
to use and which to discard. 
In the photo above, you see a split 
lobster stock
Roasting the shells lends a deeper flavor to the stock, which 
can be used to make seafood soups, stews, sauces, or 
risotto. It freezes well for up to 3 months.  Yields about 6 cups
Split 4 or 5 cooked lobster bodies with kitchen shears or a heavy 
knife. Remove and discard the stomach sack from behind the eyes 
(see above) and the tomalley (the light green part), if you like. Put 
the bodies (including the roe if female) and claw and tail shells on 
a large rimmed baking sheet and toss with 2 Tbs. olive oil. Arrange 
in a single layer and roast in the upper third of the oven at 450°F 
until the shells look slightly bleached and dry, about 20 minutes. 
Transfer the shells to an 8 quart stockpot. Add 1 cup dry white 
wine to the baking sheet and scrape up any brown bits. Pour 
the wine mixture into the stockpot and add 12 cups water, the 
dark green leaves from 1 large leek, 6 smashed and peeled large 
garlic cloves, 3 large sprigs fresh tarragon, 2 Tbs. tomato paste, 
a 1x3 inch strip orange zest, 1 tsp. kosher salt, and 1 tsp. cracked 
black peppercorns. Bring to a boil, skimming off any foam. Reduce 
the heat and cook at a gentle simmer until the stock is full flavored, 
1½  to 2 hours. 
Set a colander over a large bowl and strain the stock, pressing on 
and then discarding the solids. Cool completely before refrigerat
ing or freezing.                                                         —Diana Andrews, contributor
RECIPE
Photographs by Scott Phillips
if you’re making the lobster rolls
RECIPE
ROE
TOMALLEY
STOMACH
cooked female lobster. The stomach is the 
sack about an inch behind the eyes. It’s full 
of debris and should be removed from both 
sides of the body. 
The tomalley, or light green matter, acts 
as the lobster’s liver and pancreas. Delicious 
and prized by many, it lends depth to the 
stock, but if you prefer to leave it out, just 
slide your ﬁ nger under it to remove it. 
In a female lobster, you will usually ﬁ nd 
eggs, or roe, which are dark greenish black 
when raw and bright red and ﬁ rm when fully 
cooked. They’re edible either way and give 
more ﬂ avor to the stock, so leave them in. 
You can freeze the lobster shells until 
you’re ready to make stock.  
—Shelley Wiseman
Get more from your lobster
88  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 89 ---
Don’t have a bamboo steamer? 
Use a pasta pot instead
the lobster bao recipe on page 76 calls for a wok
and bamboo steamer baskets for steaming the bao buns. 
If you don’t have this equipment on hand but you do have 
a pasta pot with both a shallow steamer insert and a deeper 
pasta insert, then you’re all set. Simply ﬁ ll the pot with 
water to just under the level of the deeper insert, line the 
bottom of both inserts with perforated parchment rounds, 
and proceed with the recipe.                                          —S. W.
Frozen lobster 
that’s almost as 
good as fresh
If you don’t have time to prepare 
the live lobsters yourself for the 
lobster rolls on page 74, frozen 
lobster meat makes a surprisingly 
good substitute for fresh. We like 
Cozy Harbor Maine Lobster (cozy 
harbor.com) for its tender claw 
and knuckle meat, which is flash-
frozen at sea. Just be prepared to 
pay for the convenience—a 7-oz. 
package costs about $16, and 
you’ll need at least two to make 
the lobster rolls.
—Melissa Roberts, contributor
INGREDIENT
TIP
F I N ECOOKI N G .COM  89

--- Page 90 ---
How to prep a mango
mangos lend sweet, tropical flavor to the Blueberry Fruit Salad 
on page 25, but with their large, ﬂ at seeds and slippery ﬂ esh, they can be 
tricky to prepare. Here’s one way to do it: Balance the mango on one of 
its narrower sides and with a sharp, slender knife, slightly oﬀ set from the 
stem, slice oﬀ  one of the wide sides of the mango—try to cut as close to the 
seed as possible, adjusting your knife position if you hit it 1 . Repeat with 
the other wide side. Cut the remaining narrow sides away from the seed 2 . 
Cut each wide side into three or more lengthwise slices—the number and 
width of the slices depends on how big you ultimately want the pieces of 
mango to be. Working with one slice at a time and holding the knife parallel 
to the cutting board, slice the ﬂ esh away from the skin 3 . From there, cut 
up the peeled mango however you like.                        —Jennifer Armentrout
TECHNIQUE
EQUIPMENT
The perfect vacation knives
you never know what kitchen equipment will 
come with your vacation rental (see “Cooking Away,” 
page 40), and sharp knives are unlikely. To be sure 
you have what you need and to avoid taking your 
good heavy knives with you, consider getting some 
Kai Pure Komachi 2 Nonstick knives. The high-
carbon stainless-steel knives have a colorful nonstick 
coating for easy slicing and are lightweight and 
aﬀ ordable (see “Where To Buy It” for a mail-order 
source). To cover the essentials, we recommend the 
8-inch chef’s knife, the bread knife, and the paring 
knife, which comes with a sheath.                    —S. W.
1
2
3
INGREDIENT
Why we love 
Maldon 
sea salt
We sometimes call 
for “flaky sea salt, 
such as Maldon” in 
our recipes. 
Produced in the town of 
Maldon, Essex, England, 
where traditional 
salt-making techniques 
date back almost two 
thousand years, it’s 
different from other sea 
salts. To make Maldon salt, sea 
water is purified and then boiled to 
saturation, rather than sun dried, to create 
delicate, pure white pyramid-shaped crystals 
that crumble easily in your fingers and melt on 
your tongue. It’s a beautiful finishing salt for 
meats, breads, and other dishes, like the 
heirloom tomato salad on page 71. Less bitter 
than fine-grained salt, it pairs nicely with 
desserts as well.                                                          —J. R.
90  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG / S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 91 ---
Tequila is sold in three main catego-
ries—blanco (silver), reposado 
(rested), and añejo (aged)—so 
whether you’re drinking it (Mar-
garita, page 32) or cooking with it 
(Blueberry Fruit Salad, page 25), it’s 
good to understand their diﬀ erences. 
Whichever kind you buy, look for 
100 percent agave on the label, which 
means there are no additives, includ-
ing caramel (often used for tequilas 
sold as “gold”) or glycerine (an inex-
pensive way of adding smoothness 
and sweetness).                           —S. W.
Añejo (aged)  Amber tequila 
aged in oak barrels for more 
than 12 months and some
times for several years. Fla-
vor: Spicy but muted by the 
oak, which gives it a cognac
like flavor. Uses: After dinner 
drink, in cakes and other 
desserts instead of brandy or 
dark rum. Suggested brands: 
Cazadores, $43; Partida, $60.
Reposado (rested)  Light 
amber tequila rested in oak 
barrels for 2 to 12 months. 
Flavor: Smoky and sweet, 
enhanced by a subtle oak 
overtone. Uses: Premium 
margaritas, straight sipping, 
and in dishes where a more 
pronounced tequila flavor is 
desired. Suggested brands: 
El Jimador, $23; Chinaco, $46. 
Blanco (silver)  Clear, unaged 
tequila. Flavor: Clean with 
an earthy, slightly smoky 
spiciness. Uses: Mixed drinks, 
straight sipping, and for cook
ing where a light flavor is re
quired, such as a sauce base. 
Suggested brands: Espolón, 
$24; Herradura, $45.
GLOSSARY
Know your tequilas
Now as tasty on the outside as they are on the inside.
cheesesticks.com
As you savor every cheesy bite of John Wm. Macyʼs crunchy unique 
snacks, with fine aged cheeses, spices and fresh sourdough, 
you know youʼve found something special.  We thought 
the package should be just as special, too!

--- Page 92 ---
“ Versatile Grenache grapes create rosés with excellent 
acidity and a delicate cranberry tartness that balances 
zesty flavors.”
Pairings
What to drink with what’s in this issue.  B Y PAT RIC K WAT S ON
Chicken
Grilled Chicken with Couscous, p. 14
Pair with Pinot Grigio
WHY  The natural acidity and residual sugar 
found in these crisp whites balance the curry 
spices and mango in this chicken dinner.
BOTTLES  2011 Charles Smith K Vintners 
Vino Evergreen Vineyard Pinot Grigio,  
Columbia Valley, Washington ($12); 2012  
Cora Pinot Grigio, Veneto, Italy ($10).
Beef, Pork & Lamb
Grilled Lamb Skewers with Orzo, p. 15
Pair with amber ale
WHY  Amber ales are smooth and slightly 
spicy with generous fruity-herbal undertones 
that play well with salty halloumi, rich lamb, 
and fresh herbs and scallions.
BOTTLES  Breckenridge Brewery Avalanche 
Amber Ale, Breckenridge, Colorado ($1.50/ 
12 oz.); Full Sail Brewing Amber Ale, Hood 
River, Oregon ($1.75/12 oz.).
Chorizo with Grilled Potato Salad, p. 17
Pair with white Rioja
WHY  Viura, the most common white wine 
grape in Spain’s Rioja region, produces wines 
with mouthwatering acidity and gentle fruiti-
ness to tame the spicy chorizo here.
BOTTLES  2012 Bodegas Muga Blanco, Rioja, 
Spain ($15); 2012 CVNE Compañia Vinicola 
del Norte de España Monopole Blanco, Rioja, 
Spain ($13).
Grilled Pork Sandwich, p. 18
Pair with Gamay
WHY  The delicious red fruit and berry flavors 
in these light-bodied red wines bring out the 
fennel, allspice, and fresh dill in this sandwich.
BOTTLES  2012 Domaine Marcel Lapierre 
Raisins Gaulois, Beaujolais, France ($14);  
2011 Grosjean Frères Gamay Vallée d’Aoste, 
Italy ($21).
Parmesan-Panko Steaks, p. 19
Pair with Dolcetto d’Alba
WHY  These smooth Italian reds have fresh 
tannins that pair beautifully with salty Parmi-
giano-Reggiano, steak, and juicy tomatoes. 
BOTTLES  2010 Brovia Vignavillej Dolcetto 
d’Alba, Piedmonte, Italy ($21); 2010 Icardi 
Rousori Dolcetto d’Alba, Piedmonte, Italy ($17).
Grilled Leg of Lamb, p. 43
Pair with Cabernet Sauvignon
WHY  No matter where these red wine grapes 
are grown, they tend to have a mildly briny 
black olive flavor that enhances this olive 
purée and balances the char on this lamb.
BOTTLES  2010 Terrazas de los Andes 
Reserva Cabernet Sauvignon, Mendoza, 
Argentina ($19); 2009 Château Moulin de 
Tricot, Margaux, Bordeaux, France ($43).
Grilled Denver Steak, p. 58
Pair with Central Coast Syrah
WHY  The long, cool growing season on Cali-
fornia’s central coast produces rich, complex 
Syrahs with layered fruits that go well with 
grilled beef, ripe tomatoes, and tangy capers.
BOTTLES  2011 Edmunds St. John Wylie- 
Fenaughty Syrah, El Dorado County, Califor-
nia ($28); 2010 Qupé Syrah, Central Coast, 
California ($14).
Drinks
Ham, Egg, and Cheese Melt, p. 44
Pair with Cava
WHY  These affordable sparkling wines from 
Spain are dry and crisp with great minerality 
for cutting through these rich sandwiches. 
BOTTLES  Raventos I Blanc L’Hereu Reserva 
Brut Cava, Penedes, Spain ($15); Vinos de 
Terruños German Gilabert Cava Brut Nature 
Reserva, Penedes, Spain ($14).
Spicy Italian Sandwich, p. 46
Pair with pilsner
WHY  The refreshing, aromatic nature of a 
pilsner offsets salty meats and cheese and 
plays up fresh herbs, like oregano.
BOTTLES  Radeberger Exportbierbrauerei 
Pilsner, Radeberg, Germany ($1.65/12 oz.); 
Stoudts Brewing Company Pilsner, Adam-
stown, Pennsylvania ($1.65/12 oz.).
Pork with Grilled Pepper Relish, p. 52
Pair with red wine from Bierzo, Spain
WHY  Reds from this northwestern Spanish 
wine region are medium bodied with brilliant 
acidity and bright red cherry notes that tem-
per the spice in this grilled pepper relish.
BOTTLES  2010 Bodegas y Viñedos Mengoba 
Brezo Mencía, Bierzo, Spain ($14); 2011 Vinos 
de Valtuille de Abajo Pago de Valdoneje, 
Bierzo, Spain ($13).
Shoulder Petite Tender, p. 58
Pair with Barbera d’Alba
WHY  These reds have supple tannins and 
lively acidity that enhance the slightly bitter 
spinach and tangy pickled shallots. 
BOTTLES  2010 Palmina Barbera, Santa Bar-
bara County, California ($18); 2010 Elio Altare 
Barbera d’Alba, Piedmonte, Italy ($16).
Flat Iron Steak with Soba Noodles, p. 59
Pair with red wine from the Languedoc
WHY  Reds from this warm coastal region in 
southern France have velvety textures, spicy 
red fruit notes, and a hint of salt that comple-
ments soy and sesame flavors as well as beef.
BOTTLES  2010 Domaine Bassac Syrah, 
Vin de Pays des Côtes de Thongue, France 
($9); 2009 Domaine Léon Barral Faugères, 
Languedoc-Roussillon, France ($28).
Pasta
Grilled Eggplant Noodle Bowl, p. 51
Pair with India Pale Ale (IPA)
WHY  The rich, earthy hops and zesty carbon-
ation of a great IPA will cleanse your palate 
between each bite of these soy-and-sesame-
dressed noodles.
BOTTLES  Founders Brewing Company 
Centennial India Pale Ale, Grand Rapids, 
Michigan ($1.60/12 oz.); Ithaca Beer Co. 
Flower Power India Pale Ale, Ithaca, New 
York ($11/375 ml).
92  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ s e p t 2 0 13

--- Page 93 ---
“ Viura, the most common white wine grape grown in 
Spain’s Rioja region, produces wines with mouth-
watering acidity and a gentle fruitiness that tames 
spicy, smoky foods.”
Grilled Straw and Hay Fettucine, p. 53
Pair with Albariño
WHY  Albariño’s mouthwatering Meyer lemon 
and green apple notes oﬀ set the richness of 
this creamy pasta.
BOTTLES  2011 Lagar de Costa Albariño, 
Rias Baixas, Spain ($16); 2010 Hendry Vine-
yard Albariño, Napa Valley, California ($18).
Spaghetti with Tomato Conserva, p. 70
Pair with Montepulciano d’Abruzzo
WHY  Montepulciano grapes from the Abruzzo 
wine region in central Italy have medium 
body and spicy fruit ﬂ avors that bring out the 
pancetta and calm the crushed red pepper in 
this pasta.
BOTTLES  2010 Cora Montepulciano d’Abruzzo, 
Abruzzo, Italy ($10); 2011 Cantina Colonnella 
Le Corone Montepulciano d’Abruzzo, 
Abruzzo, Italy ($11).
Vegetarian Mains
White Bean Burgers, p. 15
Pair with Grenache rosé
WHY  Versatile Grenache grapes create rosés 
with excellent acidity and a delicate cranberry 
tartness that balances these zesty bean burgers. 
BOTTLES  2012 Château Valcombe Côtes du 
Ventoux Epicure Rosé, Rhône, France ($14); 
2012 Donkey and Goat Isabel’s Cuvée Grenache 
Rosé, McDowell Valley, California ($22).
Grilled Eggplant Rolls, p. 51
Pair with Greek white wine
WHY  These whites—remarkably tart and as 
refreshing as sparkling water—deliciously 
oﬀ set salty foods like feta and olives.
BOTTLES  2011 Domaine Sigalas Assyrtiko, 
Santorini, Greece ($17); 2011 Skouras Mosco-
ﬁ lero, Peloponnese, Greece ($12).
Grilled Zucchini Panini, p. 53
Pair with Arneis
WHY  Delicate and aromatic, white wines 
made from this native Italian varietal pair 
well with the nutty grilled zucchini and lemon 
zest that enliven this sandwich.
BOTTLES  2011 Mosca Bianca Langhe Arneis, 
Piedmonte, Italy ($20); 2011 Seghesio Fam-
ily Vineyards Arneis, Russian River Valley, 
California ($19).
Grilled Onion and Sage Flatbread, p. 54
Pair with saison ale
WHY  Earthy and refreshing, saison pale ales 
have a soft texture and a hint of spice that 
tastes great with sage and grilled onions. 
BOTTLES  Pretty Things Jack d’Or Saison 
Americain, Somerville, Massachusetts ($8/22 
oz.); Evil Twin Brewing Ryan and the Beaster 
Bunny Saison Ale, Denmark ($15/22 oz.).
Heirloom Tomato and Cheese Pie, p. 64
Pair with citrusy Sauvignon Blanc
WHY  This varietal’s naturally fresh ﬂ avor of 
ruby-red grapefruit oﬀ sets the rich pie while 
accentuating the ripe tomatoes and herbs. 
BOTTLES  2011 Crocker & Starr Sauvignon 
Blanc, Napa Valley, California ($28); 2011 
Casa Marin Cartagena Sauvignon Blanc, 
San Antonio Valley, Chile ($15).
Seafood
Shrimp Salad with Honeydew, p. 18
Pair with Loire Valley Vouvray
WHY  The stonefruit ﬂ avors in these medium-
dry white wines perfectly complement the 
sweet honeydew in this salad while enhancing 
the creamy feta and briny shrimp. 
BOTTLES  2010 François Pinon Vouvray 
Cuvée Tradition, Loire, France ($17); 2011 Do-
maine Bourillon Dorléans Vouvray La Coulée 
d’Argent Vieilles Vignes, Loire, France ($15).
Tilapia with Cilantro Pesto, p. 19
Pair with an aperitif wine
WHY  Wines ﬂ avored or fortiﬁ ed with botani-
cals or liqueurs or both can have herbal and 
mandarin notes and luscious textures that 
perfectly suit this mild ﬁ sh with herby pesto. 
Serve on the rocks with a lemon twist. 
BOTTLES  Lillet Rosé, Bordeaux, France 
($20); Dolin Vermouth de Chambéry Blanc, 
Savoie, France ($16).
Seafood Stew, p. 45
Pair with Txakoli
WHY  The Basque region of Spain is home 
to briny, zesty, slightly eﬀ ervescent white 
wines that are just the thing for a buttery 
seafood stew. 
BOTTLES  2012 Ameztoi Txakoli di Getaria 
Hondarribi Zuri, Getariako Txakolina, Spain 
($16); 2010 Talai Berri Txakoli, Getariako 
Txakolina, Spain ($19).
New England Lobster Roll, p. 74
Pair with New England lager
WHY  The classic combination of sweet, 
mayo-dressed lobster meat on a buttered roll 
and a crisp, refreshing lager cannot be beat.
BOTTLES  Samuel Adams Boston Lager, 
Boston, Massachusetts ($1.50/12 oz.); Narra-
gansett Brewing Company Lager, Providence, 
Rhode Island ($1/16 oz.).
Lobster Bao, p. 76
Pair with Junmai sake
WHY  These luscious ﬁ ltered sakes have soft 
earthy notes of Anjou pear and mushrooms 
that balance the spice of the chile butter and 
the sweetness of the lobster.
BOTTLES  Otokoyama Junmai Sake, Hok-
kaido, Japan ($24/500 ml); Sato No Homare 
Pride of The Village Sake, Junmai Ginjo, 
Japan ($18/300 ml).
A former sommelier, Patrick Watson is a Fine 
Cooking contributing editor and owner of Smith 
& Vine wine shop in Brooklyn, New York.
Want more pairings? Our tablet edition 
includes bonus pairing suggestions for 
more recipes from this issue.
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  93

--- Page 94 ---
Recipes
Calories 
(kcal)
Fat Cal 
(kcal)
Protein 
(g)
Carb 
(g)
Total 
Fat (g)
Sat 
Fat (g)
Mono 
Fat (g)
Poly 
Fat (g)
Chol 
(mg)
Sodium 
(mg)
Fiber 
(g)
Make iT TonighT, P. 14 
Grilled Potato Scallion Salad with Chorizo
860
580
31
39
65
19
28
15
105
1780
4
Warm Shrimp Salad with Honeydew and Feta
530
260
45
23
29
11
13
3
310
1210
4
Grilled Lamb, Tomato, and Halloumi Skewers with Orzo 
850
370
56
62
42
16
17
3
140
1300
5
Tilapia with Cilantro Walnut Pesto
350
250
24
2
28
7
15
5
70
270
1
Parmesan Panko Steaks with Fresh Tomato Salsa
430
240
30
18
27
6
16
3
170
620
2
White Bean Burgers with Tomato Olive Relish
400
130
17
52
15
3.5
8
2.5
55
970
9
Chicken with Curried Couscous, Spinach, and Mango
640
250
44
56
29
4
18
4.5
95
320
9
Grilled Pork Sandwiches with Fennel, Dill, and Cucumber
430
190
32
25
21
4
7
9
80
530
3
PlanTainS, P. 21 
Plátanos Maduros Fritos
150
60
1
24
7
1
3
3
0
0
2
bluebeRRieS, P. 24 
Quick Blueberry Jam (per 1 Tbs.)
30
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Blueberry Fruit Salad with Tequila Lime Syrup
180
5
1
41
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
4
Blueberry Muffin Cake
400
130
6
63
15
9
4
1
80
270
2
SuMMeR CoCkTailS, P. 31 
Margarita
200
0
0
28
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Negroni
190
0
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Daiquiri
170
0
0
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
vaCaTion Cooking, P. 40 
Spicy Italian Ham and Salami Sandwich
680
410
38
31
46
16
21
3
100
2640
2
Grilled Boneless Leg of Lamb with Black Olive Purée
450
260
44
3
29
6
18
2.5
135
710
1
Simple Seafood Stew
440
130
48
15
15
5
5
2
185
1590
1
Summer Fruit Cobbler
300
110
3
45
13
8
3.5
0.5
35
100
3
Ham, Egg, and Cheese Melt
650
420
30
28
47
18
16
9
275
1260
4
gaRden To gRill, P. 48 
Grilled Pepper Panzanella
190
130
3
14
14
2
10
1.5
0
150
3
Spanish Style Potato Salad with Grilled Peppers
250
130
4
28
14
2
3
8
10
310
4
Pork Tenderloin with Spicy Grilled Pepper Relish
140
35
22
5
4
1
1.5
0.5
60
470
1
Thai Style Grilled Corn Soup
120
60
5
15
6
3.5
0
0
0
530
1
Grilled Corn Planks with Tarragon Crème Fraîche
190
110
4
17
12
7
3.5
0.5
25
90
2
Grilled Corn and Orzo Salad with Basil
230
100
5
28
11
1.5
8
1.5
0
220
2
Lebanese Grilled Eggplant Dip
160
120
4
9
13
2.5
6
4
5
150
3
Grilled Eggplant Noodle Bowl
270
35
3
53
3.5
0.5
1.5
1
0
910
3
Grilled Eggplant Rolls with Feta and Olives
70
50
2
4
6
2.5
3
0
10
190
1
Grilled Zucchini with Spicy Peanut Sauce
200
160
6
9
17
9
4
2.5
0
300
3
Grilled Zucchini Panini
520
130
22
76
15
6
6
2
30
1130
4
Grilled Straw and Hay Fettuccine
370
140
13
45
15
9
4
1
50
630
3
Grilled Onions with Thyme and Cream
120
100
1
5
11
7
3
0
40
85
1
Grilled Onion and Sage Flatbread
210
70
5
28
8
1
4.5
0.5
0
660
1
Grilled Onion and Gorgonzola Dip
100
80
3
2
9
3
1.5
3
15
190
0
Garlicky Grilled Portobellos with Breadcrumbs
170
120
3
8
14
2
10
1.5
0
180
1
Grilled Portobello Bisque
250
160
7
13
18
10
4.5
1
50
350
2
Grilled Portobello Quesadillas
790
310
35
89
35
17
6
2.5
85
1670
7
kindeST CuTS, P. 56 
Grilled Denver Steak and Tomatoes with Vinaigrette
340
210
24
9
23
6
14
2.5
85
600
2
Carpaccio Style Shoulder Petite Tender with Spinach
230
180
11
2
20
4
14
2
35
200
1
Flat Iron Steak with Zucchini, Edamame, and Noodles
460
100
27
57
11
2.5
4.5
3.5
50
2450
6
biSCuiTS, P. 60 
Buttermilk Biscuits
190
80
4
23
9
6
2.5
0
25
350
1
Cinnamon Raisin Walnut Pinwheels
370
170
5
47
20
10
4.5
4
40
360
2
Maple Peach Dumplings
430
130
6
71
14
9
3.5
1
35
500
3
Heirloom Tomato and Cheese Pie
430
220
10
42
25
11
6
6
45
860
3
Sesame Poppy Pecan Crackers
150
70
3
15
8
3.5
2.5
1.5
25
270
1
ToMaTo ConSeRva, P. 68 
Tomato Conserva (per 1/4 cup)
110
80
1
6
9
1.5
7
1
0
100
2
Tomato and Burrata Salad with Tomato Vinaigrette
270
260
0
2
29
4
21
3
0
310
1
Spaghetti with Tomato Conserva and Pancetta
620
290
17
64
33
7
19
3.5
25
990
6
lobSTeR RollS, P. 72 
New England Lobster Roll
640
410
33
23
46
13
11
20
260
1770
1
Chile Butter Lobster Bao
570
260
18
57
29
17
8
2.5
155
460
2
SeMiFReddo, P. 80 
Chocolate Hazelnut Semifreddo
370
230
5
32
25
12
6
1
135
115
3
Apricot Thyme Semifreddo
230
120
3
25
14
8
4.5
1
135
110
1
Raspberry Balsamic Semifreddo
320
180
4
31
20
11
6
1
175
110
1
nutrition
The nutritional analyses have been calculated by a registered dietitian 
at Nutritional Solutions in Melville, New York. When a recipe gives a 
choice of ingredients, the first choice is the one used. Optional ingre-
dients with measured amounts are included; ingredients with out 
specific quantities are not. Analyses are per serving; when a range of 
ingredient amounts or servings is given, the smaller amount or portion 
is used. When the quantities of salt and pepper aren’t specified, the 
analysis is based on 1/4 tsp. salt and 1/8 tsp. pepper per serving for 
entrées, and 1/8 tsp. salt and 1/16 tsp. pepper per serving for side dishes. 
94  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 95 ---
•  Maple wood chips, $5.95 for 2 lb., ﬁ recraft.com, 
800-745-6109.
•  Peach wood chips, $4.99 for 2 lb., 
cabelas.com, 800-237-4444.
From homedepot.com, 800-466-3337:
• Apple wood chips, $3.99 for 3 lb.
• Hickory wood chips, $3.99 for 3 lb.
• Cherry wood chips, $3.99 for 3 lb.
• Alder wood chips, $4.99 for 2 lb.
• Weber stainless-steel perforated grill pan, $19.99.
• Bradley Smoker digital thermometer, $24.98. 
• Brinkmann cast-iron smoker box, $11.97
summer cocktails, p. 31 
•  Rocks glasses and martini glass, 
courtesy of New Preston Kitch-
en Goods, newprestonkitchen
.com, 860-868-1264.
•  Wood citrus reamer, $4.95, 
surlatable.com, 800-243-0852.
From amazon.com, 866-216-1072:
•  Swissmar stainless-steel 
Hawthorne strainer, $10.16.
•  Premium 24-oz. stainless-steel 
cocktail shaker, $12.20.
•  Winco 11-inch cocktail spoon,
$2 90.
behind the kitchen 
door, p. 35
From subzero-wolf.com, or 800-
222-7820 for dealers:
•  Sub-Zero side-by-side refrigera-
torèfreezer (BI-48S) in overlay, 
$8,975. 
•  Sub-Zero 424 wine storage 
refrigerator, $3,140 to $4,015. 
•  Wolf 30-inch L Series built-in 
single oven (SO30U/S), $4,860.
•  Wolf 36-inch 6-burner gas range
(GR366), $6,060.
test kitchen, p. 87
•  Progressive 8-quart spaghetti steamer, $39.25, amazon.com, 866-216-1072.
•  Maldon sea salt flakes, $9 for 8¾   oz., deananddeluca.com, 800-221-7714.
From cutleryandmore.com, 800-650-9866
• Kai Pure Komachi 2 8-inch bread knife, $9.95.
• Kai Pure Komachi 2 8-inch chef’s knife, $11.95.
• Kai Pure Komachi 2 paring knife, $9.95. 
cooking away, p. 40
•  Crow Canyon Home enamel dinner plate with red 
rim (lamb), $6.29, kolorfulkitchen.com, 888-565-
6738.
•  Circulon nonstick skillet, 8- to 12-inches, $24.99 
to $59.99, circulon.com, 800-326-3933.
•  McCormick sea salt and black pepper grinders, 
$14.40 for both, amazon.com, 866-216-1072.
•  Colorful Tapas oval blue plate (cobbler), 
$34 for four, potterybarn.com, 888-779-5176. 
From shopterrain.com, 877-583-7724:
• Ceramic Seaside bowl (olive purée), $20. 
• Bands plate (green beans), $28.
• Petals plate (green beans), $18.
• Mason jar shakers, $16 for two.
• Lakeside striped mug, in poppy, $20.
• Red-striped linen napkin, $18.
From westelm.com, 888-922-4119:
• Dip-dye placemats, $14 for two. 
• Ice blue crafted bowls, $40 for four.
From cutleryandmore.com, 800-650-9866:
• Kai Pure Komachi 2 8-inch bread knife, $9.95.
• Kai Pure Komachi 2 8-inch chef’s knife, $11.95.
• Kai Pure Komachi 2 paring knife, $9.95.
From williams-sonoma.com, 877-812-6235:
• Large flexible nylon spatula, $9 95.
• 12-inch stainless-steel tongs, $11.95.
• Medium silicone spatula, $9.95.
• Oxo instant-read thermometer, $12.
biscuits, p. 60
•  Platter, courtesy of Farm Fresh Home, 
Woodbury, Connecticut, 203-263-6400.
•  Sabre frosted acrylic demitasse spoon,
courtesy of New Preston Kitchen Goods, 
newprestonkitchen.com, 860-868-1264.
•  Peaches, courtesy of Melissa’s Produce, 
melissas.com, 800-588-0151.
blueberries, p. 24
From crateandbarrel.com, 
800-967-6696:
•  French Kitchen marble pedestal,
$29.95.
•  10½-inch glass snack bowl,
$19.95.
cover
•  Sabre Natura red flatware, cour-
tesy of New Preston Kitchen 
Goods, newprestonkitchen
.com, 860-868-1264.
•  Napkin, courtesy of Privet 
House, privethouse.com, 
860-868-1800.
WHERE TO BUY IT
Photographs by Scott Phillips
337:
.
grill pan, $19.99.
ter, $24.98.
$11.97
• Pe
• Ma
• La
• Re
From
• Dip
• Ice
From
• Ka
• Ka
• Ka
10 things you didn’t know you could smoke, p. 78
F I N E COOKI N G .COM  95

--- Page 96 ---
Summer Brunch
Melons with Ginger Syrup
FineCooking.com
Blueberry Muﬃ  n-Cake
page 24
Ham, Egg, and Cheese Melt
page 44
To drink: Coﬀ ee and tea
Labor Day Celebration
Margaritas
page 32
Lebanese Grilled Eggplant Dip
page 51
Sesame-Poppy-Pecan Crackers
page 65
Heirloom Tomato and Burrata Salad 
with Tomato Conserva Vinaigrette
page 71
Grilled Boneless Leg of Lamb 
with Black Olive Purée
page 43
Spanish-Style Grilled Pepper Potato Salad
page 52
Raspberry-Balsamic Semifreddo
page 83
To drink: Dr. Konstantin Frank 
Chateau Frank Célèbre Sparkling Rosé, 
Finger Lakes, New York
MENUS
Weeknight Pairings 
from the Grill
Grilled Portobello Quesadillas
page 55
Grilled Corn and Orzo Salad 
with Basil
page 50
Grilled Onion and Sage Flatbread
page 54
Grilled Eggplant Rolls 
with Feta and Olives
page 51
Pork Tenderloin with 
Spicy Grilled Pepper Relish
page 52
Grilled Corn Planks with 
Tarragon Crème Fraîche
page 50
Grilled Portobello Bisque
page 55
Grilled Denver Steak and Tomatoes 
with Caper-Mustard Vinaigrette
page 58
Picnic in the Park
Grilled Onion and Gorgonzola Dip
page 54
Potato chips and blanched 
green beans for dipping
Spicy Italian Ham 
and Salami Sandwich
page 46
Blueberry Fruit Salad 
with Tequila-Lime Syrup
page 25
To drink: 2012 San Giovanni Pasini 
Il Chiaretto Valtènesi Chiaretto, 
Lombardy, Italy
Weekend Dinner 
with Friends
Seared Carpaccio-Style Shoulder 
Petite Tender with Spinach
page 58
Simple Seafood Stew
page 45
Maple-Peach Dumplings
page 67
To drink: 2010 Cascina Tavijn 
Ruché di Castagnole Monferrato, 
Piedmont, Italy
Asian Inspired Lunch
Thai-Style Grilled Corn Soup
page 50
Chile-Butter Lobster Bao
page 76
Mango-Honey-Mint Sorbet
FineCooking.com
To drink: 2011 Montinore Estate Pinot 
Gris, Willamette Valley, Oregon
96  FI N E COOK I NG • A UG/ S E P T 2 0 13
Photographs by Scott Phillips, except bottom right by Jennifer May

--- Page 97 ---
BULKFOODS.COM
NUTS, CANDY, CHOCOLATE,
INGREDIENTS & SPICES
Over 2,500+ Items 
419-537-1713
Order Online!
Solid Copper Heat Diffusers 
and Defroster Plates
Equalized Heating – No hot spots
They really work! - because Copper conducts heat better.
805 218 3241
www.BellaCopper.com
Fine Cooking apps on your iPad™ let you bring inspiration 
wherever you go – with video demos, expert audio tips, 
enticing photos, great recipes, and touch-screen features.
Purchase now from the App Store
Fine Cooking: 
CookFresh
Fine Cooking: 
Cooking for 
the Holidays
Recipes from 
Harvest to Heat
© 2011 The Taunton Press 
iPad is the property of Apple and is a registered trademark
Available on the
App Store
Tap these apps for delicious ideas
cook’s market
Advertiser  
website 
PAge
Appliances
KitchenAid 
www.kitchenaid.com 
p. 99
KitchenAid 
www.kitchenaidgrills.com 
p. 11
Wolf Appliance 
www.wolfappliance.com 
p. 2
books / education / travel
Fine Cooking OnLine Store 
www.finecooking.com/shopnow 
p. 34
Moveable Feast 
www.finecooking.tv/feast 
p. 4
SF Chefs 
www.sfchefsfoodandwine.com 
p. 86
gourmet Foods
America’s Beef Producers 
www.beefitswhatsfordinner.com 
p. 100
BelGioioso Cheese 
www.belgioioso.com 
p. 39
Eden Foods 
www.edenfoods.com 
p. 33
Fage USA   
www.fagetotalchallenge.com 
p. 16
John Wm. Macy’s Cheesesticks 
www.cheesesticks.com 
p. 91
ingredients
Bulk Foods 
www.bulkfoods.com 
p. 97
Colavita 
www.colavita.com 
p. 9
Kitchen design
Velux America 
www.dramaheights.com 
p. 20
Kitchen tools & Utensils
Bella Copper 
www.bellacopper.com 
p. 97
Chef’s Choice 
www.chefschoice.com 
p. 13
Gel Pro 
www.gelpro.com 
p. 39
Japanese Chef’s Knife 
www.japanesechefsknife.com 
p. 11
Kitchen & Company 
www.kitchenandcompany.com 
p. 39
Kuhn Rikon 
www.kuhnrikon.com/fine 
p. 11
wine
Palm Bay International 
www.palmbay.com/cinzano 
p. 7
Index to advertIsers
Advertiser  
website 
PAge
f i n ecooki n g .com  97

--- Page 98 ---
Side Dishes
Grilled Corn and Orzo Salad  
with Basil  ...............................................50
Grilled Corn Planks with  
Tarragon Crème Fraîche  .................50
Grilled Onions with  
Thyme and Cream .............................54
Grilled Pepper Panzanella  ..............52
Grilled Zucchini with  
Spicy Peanut Sauce  ..........................53
Plátanos Maduros Fritos  .................22
Spanish Style Grilled Pepper  
Potato Salad  ........................................52
Condiments
Quick Blueberry Jam ........................25
Tomato Conserva  ..............................70
Beverages
Daiquiri ..................................................32
Margarita ...............................................32
Negroni  .................................................32
Sweets
Apricot Thyme Semifreddo  ......... 84
Blueberry Muffin Cake  ....................24
Cinnamon Raisin Walnut  
Pinwheels  ............................................ 66
Chocolate Hazelnut  
Semifreddo  .........................................85
Maple Peach Dumplings  ................67
Raspberry Balsamic Semifreddo  ....83
Summer Fruit Cobbler  .....................47
Cover
Grilled Denver Steak and Tomatoes 
with Caper Mustard Vinaigrette  ....58
Appetizers
Garlicky Grilled Portobellos  
with Breadcrumbs ............................55
Grilled Eggplant Rolls  
with Feta and Olives  ......................... 51
Grilled Onion  
and Gorgonzola Dip  ..........................54
Lebanese Grilled Eggplant Dip  ..... 51
Seared Carpaccio Style Shoulder 
Petite Tender with Spinach  ............58
Salads
Blueberry Fruit Salad  
with Tequila Lime Syrup  .................25
Heirloom Tomato and  
Burrata Salad with  
Tomato Conserva Vinaigrette  ....... 71
Soups & Sandwiches
Grilled Pork Sandwiches with  
Fennel, Dill, and Cucumber  ............18
Grilled Portobello Bisque ................55
Grilled Portobello Quesadillas  ......55
Grilled Zucchini Panini  .....................53
Ham, Egg, and Cheese Melt  .......... 44
Spicy Italian Ham  
and Salami Sandwich  ...................... 46
Thai Style Grilled Corn Soup  .........50
Biscuits & Crackers
Buttermilk Biscuit Dough ...............62
Buttermilk Biscuits  ...........................63
Sesame Poppy Pecan Crackers  ...65
Chicken
Grilled Chicken with Curried  
Couscous, Spinach, and Mango ....14
Beef
Flat Iron Steak with Zucchini,  
Edamame, and Soba Noodles  ......59
Grilled Denver Steak and Tomatoes 
with Caper Mustard Vinaigrette  ....58
Parmesan Panko Steaks  
with Fresh Tomato Salsa  .................19
Pork & Lamb
Chorizo with Grilled  
Potato Scallion Salad .......................17
Grilled Boneless Leg of Lamb  
with Black Olive Purée  ....................43
Grilled Lamb, Tomato, and Halloumi 
Skewers with Orzo Salad  ................. 15
Grilled Pork Sandwiches with  
Fennel, Dill, and Cucumber  ............18
Pork Tenderloin with  
Spicy Grilled Pepper Relish  ............52
Seafood
Chile Butter Lobster Bao  ...............76
Lobster Stock  .................................... 88
New England Lobster Roll  ..............74
Simple Seafood Stew  .......................45
Tilapia with  
Cilantro Walnut Pesto  .....................19
Warm Shrimp Salad  
with Honeydew and Feta  ................18
Pasta
Grilled Eggplant Noodle Bowl  ........ 51
Grilled Straw and Hay Fettuccine  ...53
Spaghetti with Tomato Conserva, 
Pancetta, and Pecorino  ..................70
Meatless Mains
Grilled Eggplant Rolls  
with Feta and Olives ......................... 51
Grilled Onion  
and Sage Flatbread  ...........................54
Heirloom Tomato  
and Cheese Pie  ................................. 64
White Bean Burgers  
with Tomato Olive Relish  ............... 15
recipe index
Quick: Under 30 minutes
Make ahead: Can be 
prepared ahead (may need 
hands off cooking, baking, 
or reheating to serve)
Vegetarian: May contain 
eggs and dairy ingredients
98  fi n e cook i ng • a ug/ S E P T 2 0 13

--- Page 99 ---
With our refrigerator’s Preserva® technology,
your most daring ingredients stay fresher longer.
Ideal temperature and humidity levels make for crisper produce 
and more ﬂ avorful food, an advanced air ﬁ lter absorbs strong 
smells, and our savvy storage options make sure that big ﬁ sh will 
ﬁ t. So grab the lemons, the fennel and the ﬂ at-leaf parsley, and 
roast that snapper Mediterranean-style. Because when all your 
greatest feats start fresh, there’s so much more to make.
Find more information and culinary inspiration at kitchenaid.com
®/™  ©2013 KitchenAid.  All rights reserved.
WHOLE FISH
BRING THE
HOME

--- Page 100 ---
93% Lean Ground Beef • Recommended 3 oz. serving
154 calories • 44% of the daily value of protein
Funded by The Beef Checkoff
Get protein and 9 other essential nutrients all in one
delicious recipe at BeefItsWhatsForDinner.com
OURS HAS
AND ALL THE SIZZLE YOU CAN HANDLE.